##nt abilities may not occur in some LLMs. 2. https : / / openai. com / blog / chatgpt / the prompting interface ( e. g., GPT - 4 API ). Humans have to understand how LLMs work and format their tasks in a way that LLMs can follow. Third, the development of LLMs no longer draws a clear distinction between research and en - gineering. The training of LLMs requires extensive practical experiences in large - scale data processing and distributed parallel training. To develop capable LLMs, researchers have to solve complicated engineering issues, working with engineers or being engineers. Nowadays, LLMs are posing a significant impact on the AI community, and the advent of ChatGPT and GPT - 4 leads to the rethinking of the possibilities of artificial general intelligence ( AGI ). OpenAI has published a technical article entitled “ Planning for AGI and beyond ”, which discusses the short - term and long - term plans to approach AGI, and a more recent paper has argued that GPT - 4 might be considered as an early version of an AGI system. The research areas of AI are being revolutionized by the rapid progress of LLMs. In the field of NLP, LLMs can serve as a general - purpose language task solver ( to some extent ), and the research paradigm has been shifting towards the use of LLMs. In the field of IR, traditional search engines are challenged by the new information seeking way through AI chatbots ( i. e., ChatGPT ), and New Bing3 presents an initial attempt that enhances the search results based on LLMs. In the field of CV, the researchers try to develop ChatGPT - like vision - language models that can better serve multimodal dialogues [ 42 – 45 ], and GPT - 4 has supported multi - modal input by integrating the visual information. This new wave of technology would potentially lead to a prosperous ecosystem of real - world applications based on LLMs. For instance, Microsoft 365 is being empowered by LLMs ( i. e., Copilot ) to automate the office work, and OpenAI supports the use of plugins in ChatGPT for implementing special functions. Despite the progress and impact, the underlying prin - ciples of LLMs are still not well explored. Firstly, it is mysterious why emergent abilities occur in LLMs, instead