quality, clinically relevant insights to support informed decision - making. 6. Conclusion A framework for developing NLP and LLM is performed to improve the patient - specific outcomes of recovery in breast cancer reconstruc tion. It promotes recovery outcome prediction modeling by employing information from clinical notes, medical records, and history of treat ment. Effective text preparation was ensured by the use of Lemmatiza tion / Stemming, and feature extraction using BioBERT. ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini are two examples of prediction models that provide useful in formation about possible issues, recovery times, and psychological ef fects. Clinicians enhance rehabilitation programs, predict dangers, and optimize treatment strategies using this data - based approach. As a result, the accuracy of ChatGPT - 4 is 98. 4 % and Gemini is 98. 7 %, score per response is 2. 52 for ChatGPT - 4 and 2. 89 for Gemini. Readability of ChatGPT - 4 is 93. 0 % and Gemini is 94. 5 %, a relevance score is 95. 5 % and 94. 0 % for ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini, and time response is 2. 5 s for ChatGPT - 4 and 2. 5 s for Gemini. Issues including data privacy, model biases, and clinical validation must be resolved for deployment in healthcare situations to be faithful and honestly wide - ranging. The research on AI models in healthcare does not address computational efficiency and resource demands, which are crucial for real - time healthcare applications. Future work should focus on enhancing inter pretability features to align with clinical requirements for transparency and trust. It should evaluate these factors to ensure their effectiveness and feasibility in large - scale, resource - constrained settings. The researchalso shows high accuracy rates for ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini in breast cancer reconstruction but does not consider their performance across diverse patient populations, such as ethnic minorities, rare comorbidities, and socioeconomic backgrounds. Future research should explore these factors to improve their predictions in clinical settings. Future research should focus on improving model accuracy, diversifying datasets, and incorporating real - time clinical feedback to further enhance recovery predictions and treatment results.