has a simple architecture based on bidirectional trans - formers. BERT uses a single output layer based on the representa - tions from its last layer to compute only token level BIO2 probabilities. Note that while previous works in biomedical NER often used word embeddings trained on PubMed or PMC corpora ( Habibi, 2017 ; Yoon, 2019 ), BioBERT directly learns WordPiece embeddings during pre - training and fine - tuning. For the evaluation metrics of NER, we used entity level precision, recall and F1 score. Relation extraction is a task of classifying relations of named entities in a biomedical corpus. We utilized the sentence classifier of the original version of BERT, which uses a token for the clas - sification of relations. Sentence classification is performed using a single output layer based on a token representation from BERT. We anonymized target named entities in a sentence using pre - defined tags such as @ GENE. For instance, a sentence with two target entities ( gene and disease in this case ) is represented as “ Serine at position 986 of @ GENE. ” The preci - sion, recall and F1 scores on the RE task are reported. Question answering is a task of answering questions posed in natural language given related passages. To fine - tune BioBERT for QA, we used the same BERT architecture used for SQuAD ( Rajpurkar, 2016 ). We used the BioASQ factoid datasets be - cause their format is similar to that of SQuAD. Token level proba - bilities for the start / end location of answer phrases are computed using a single output layer. However, we observed that about 30 % of the BioASQ factoid questions were unanswerable in an extractive QA setting as the exact answers did not appear in the given pas - sages. Like Wiese, we excluded the samples with un - answerable questions from the training sets. Also, we used the same pre - training process of Wiese, which uses SQuAD, and it largely improved the performance of both BERT and BioBERT. We used the following evaluation metrics from BioASQ : strict accur - acy, lenient accuracy and mean