CD45RA ). We propose to use this ap - proach for a systematic real - life evaluation of cell type definitions and the need for new classes in CL. Application of our scheme to records in ImmPort We obtained 4388 distinct rows populated from 28 dif - ferent centers ( HIPC projects and others submitted to ImmPort ). We began by parsing the “ Population name ” field with the goal of mapping the entered text to Cell Ontology names. Only a small percentage of these were an exact match to existing Cell Ontology labels, as dis - cussed in the results. Similarly, the “ Gating definition ” field was parsed by first “ tokenizing ” each gating definition by splitting it into distinct gates. Since there was wide variation in the separators and formatting used by different centers, we constructed a set of center - specific rules for tokenizing the gates, primarily as regular expression patterns. The second step was to “ normalize ” the gate names. We used two strategies : case - insensitive match for the ‘ PRO short label ’ synonym from the Protein Ontology, and case - in - sensitive match against a manually compiled list of syno - nyms described above and shown in Tables 1 and 4. Third, we normalized the marker intensities, as described in The overall results are shown in We validated the tokenizing and normalizing steps with manual review of the list of gate names by im - munologists. The relatively large number of “ not matched ” gate names indicates both the use of many names and synonyms that were not found in ontologies, and irregularities in gating definition strings. We then wrote a second Python program to demonstrate our vi - sion of the standard terminology going forward as an interactive web page. This tool reads labels and logical definitions from the Cell Ontology, PRO short labels from the Protein Ontology, and our manual list of gate names. The user is asked to enter a cell population name from the Cell Ontology and a set of gates. The tool then displays the logical definition for the cell type and the gating strategy, and highlights any conflicts between the two. shows a screenshot of the tool. Non - protein based gates Preferred label Based on Alternative spellings encountered lymphocyte size ( FSC vs SSC ) ly, lymp, lymph, lymphocyte,