“ neg ” following the marker. Marker positive gating definitions utilized “ + ”, “ positive ”, or “ pos ”. In addition, some gating definitions required qualified variants of ‘ positive ’, which could be grouped into low vs. intermediate vs. high. In order to enable separating the marker itself from its intensity in a gating definition, we chose preferred labels for marker intensities that avoid alphanumeric characters, as well as avoiding characters commonly used as separators. Size ( scatter ) based gates Several gating definitions we encountered for flow cy - tometry data do not refer to a specific marker, but ra - ther utilize forward - and side - scatter of detector light to provide size estimates of the object passing by the detector. Such gates are commonly utilized to exclude debris and complexes of multiple cells, as well as iden - tify cell types based on size. Additional gating defini - tions relied on the use of dyes, such as Annexin stains to detect damaged or dying cells that have a ruptured membrane, or CFSE to mark cells that have divided. lists the types of values we encountered and the suggested preferred label. Such definitions of cell types based on their characteristics in a flow cytometer are best captured in the Ontology of Biomedical Investiga - tions ( OBI ), and we are in the process of submitting them there. Parsing the population name field When parsing the “ Population name ” field, many chal - lenges were encountered, with nearly a complete failure to automate this process ( < 5 % recognition ). The guide - line to use CL terms for submission of cell populations to ImmPort was found to be insufficient, as most cell populations gated for are further subsets or activation states of CL types. Thus, we revised our approach and developed a future tentative guideline whereby the data provider specifies the parent cell type in CL and adds additional markers or cell subtypes after an ‘ & ’ symbol. For example, “ BDCA3 _ pmDC ” was parsed to ‘ plasmacy - toid dendritic cell ’ & “ BDCA3 + ” and “ Temra CD4 T cells ” was parsed to ‘ effector memory CD4 - positive, Markers that could not be precisely mapped to individual PRO protein chains Label Description Suggestion