cancer or medical conditions. Additionally, Distribution of tumor distances from the nipple in reports ( A ). Frequency of tumor positions noted in reports, using a clock face orientation ( B ). Distribution of tumors across breast quadrants in reports, with responses categorized as Yes or No ( C ) Comparison of reports based on tumor focality : single focus vs. multiple foci ( A ). Distribution of the largest invasive focus dimension reported in centimeters ( B ). Bar graph displaying the most frequently reported tumor dimensions ( C ). Frequency of different histological tumor types mentioned in reports ( D ). Distribution of tumor grades based on their histological scores ( E ). Presence of carcinoma in situ as reported in pathology findings ( F ). Scatter plot showing the distribution of various carcinoma types across reports, categorized by type and presence ( G ) Journal of Medical Systems 49 : 36 Page 11 of 16 36 Journal of Medical Systems 49 : 36 36 Page 12 of 16 Distribution of DCIS ( Ductal Carcinoma in Situ ) nuclear grades across reports ( A ). Frequency of central ( comedo ) and focal ( punctate ) necrosis in DCIS cases ( B ). Comparison of reports indicat - ing whether the skin is involved or not in tumor extension ( C ). Frequency of nipple involve - ment or absence in tumor extension cases ( D ). Presence or absence of skeletal muscle involvement in tumor exten - sion ( E ). Heatmap showing the involvement status of tumor margins ( anterior, posterior, superior, inferior, medial, lat - eral ) in surgical reports ( F ) Journal of Medical Systems 49 : 36 Page 13 of 16 36 Scatter plot showing the percentage of ER positivity or nega - tivity in core biopsy and current specimen types ( A ). Scatter plot depicting the percentage of PR positivity or negativity in core biopsy and current specimens ( B ). Bar graphs displaying HER2 IHC scores by specimen type and comparing HER2 IHC scores with ISH results ( C ) Journal of Medical Systems 49 : 36 36 Page 14 of 16 while the AI demonstrated high accuracy, the small mar - gin of error observed could still be clinically significant, underscoring the need for continuous refinement.