clear summaries. Improves clinical choices through sophisticated reasoning. C. Zheng 6 specific recovery and predictive insights in breast cancer reconstruction. This segmentdeliberates the results of the research in the specific per formance parameters. 4. 1. Performance assessments The experimental result shows that Gemini has a separate advantage over ChatGPT - 4 in many significant metrics. Certain performance met rics are involved for performance analysis of the LLM models. Accuracy indicates the occurrence of model correctness ; score per response eval uates the quality of each response and overall performance. The central tendency responses are specified by the median and mean, while their consistency variability is displayed by the standard deviation. These measurements provide a thorough understanding of the models ’ reli ability and value. The outcomes of implementing Gemini and ChatGPT - 4 models ’ performance are denoted in ChatGPT - 4 performed with an accuracy of 98. 4 %, while Gemini achieved98. 7 %. Gemini scored better than ChatGPT - 4 in terms of score per response ( 2. 89 vs. 2. 52 ), and its median score was higher at 2. 8 than ChatGPT - 4 ′ s 2. 4. Furthermore, Gemini showed less response variability than ChatGPT - 4, as seen by its smaller standard deviation ( 0. 15 ) as compared to 0. 72. represents the accuracy level of LLM models in generating recovery strategies. ChatGPT - 4 performs with an accuracy of 98. 4 %, which is better than Gemini ’ s accuracy of 98. 7 %. Both models perform very well and are closely matched with a 0. 3 % accuracy difference. Score per response values is depicted in The average score assigned to each response from the ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini models is indicated by the score per response. On average, ChatGPT - 4 answers were somewhat higher than Gemini ’ s, with ChatGPT - 4 scoring 2. 52 per response and Gemini scoring 2. 89. Based on a particular evaluation technique, this score represents the caliber or applicability of the models ’ answers. 4. 1. 1. Readability The readability score refers how simple it is for people to understand a text ( such as a reconstruction recommendation, medical report, or AI output ). This score guarantees that the output produced by AI models is understandable and available to consumers, including medical experts. One common method