predict the sur vival benefit of the treatment. The survival prediction model showed predictive capability, with C - indexes ranging from 0. 778 to 0. 847. The unavoidable weakness was the built - in bias of any retro spective training. 2. 1. Research gaps Several limitations occur in breast cancer treatments and post - mastectomy lymphedema ( PML ) techniques, including reliance on retrospective data, biassed samples, and a lack of blinding. Prospective trials, varied demographics, and standardized procedures should all be used in future research. By evaluating various datasets, improving diagnostic consistency, and decision - making, ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini C. Zheng 2 models can fill these gaps and improve treatment planning and results. 3. Methodology The research aims to improve breast cancer reconstruction outcomes by using NLP and LLM to provide personalized recovery insights. The methodology involves preprocessing large volumes of medical data through lemmatization, stemming, and feature extraction using Bio BERT. Similar to ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini, the forecasting models analyze specific details, and predict recovery trajectories, complications possible during recovery, and psychosocial effects. The aim is to facilitate better clinical decision - making, develop individualized rehabilitation strate gies, and help patients receive individualized plans for recovery so that optimum recovery and quality of life can be ensured. This forms a bridge in filling the gap between life sciences and advanced computational technologies for better clinical practices and improved patient care. provides the overall proposed methodology flow. 3. 1. Breast cancer reconstruction The surgical process of reconstructing the breast following a mas tectomy or partial mastectomy is known as breast cancer reconstruction. Autologous ( flap ) reconstruction uses tissue from another area of the body, implant - based reconstruction, or a mix of the two. Reconstruction of the areolas and breasts can also be performed later. The initial healing phase lasts one to two weeks, and modest activity can resume in four to six weeks. Depending on the intricacy of the surgery and personal cir cumstances, the entire recuperation process, including breast settling and any further reconstructive treatments, could take up to a year. 3. 2. Data description Patient demographics, medical and treatment histories, clinical notes, psychological evaluations, and recovery results are