Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers for Biomedical Text Mining, or BioBERT, is a customized variant of BERT intended for use in biomedical settings. The foundation of BioBERT is the contextualized language description model of BERT, which was trained on a variety of biological and general datasets. BioBERT has outperformed BERT and other cutting - edge models in a variety of NLP tasks, together with relation extraction, Named Entity Recognition ( NER ) from biomedical data, and biomedical question - and - answer tasks. Nouns and terms that are absent from ordinary corpora are among the unique jargon used in the biomedical field. This is a problem since general - purpose language description models, such BERT, might not work well for NLP applications in the biological field. BioBERT, a lan guage representation model specialized to the biomedical domain that is based on BERT, is used in this work to overcome this problem. The output was provided in Shapley Additive Explanations ( SHAP ) analysis : Feature impor tance analysis using SHAP ( SHapley Additive exPlanations ) helps interpret the decision - making process of machine learning models. The performance of the ChatGPT Model and the Gemini Model using SHAP values on a breast cancer dataset was compared to identify which model provides better feature interpretability and accuracy. 3. 4. The proposed forecasting models chatgpt - 4 and Gemini The utilization of ChatGPT - 4, Gemini, and additional pertinent LLMs for predictive modeling encompasses forecasting postoperative compli cations, recovery durations, and psychosocial outcomes. 3. 4. 1. ChatGPT - 4 in breast cancer reconstruction Clinical notes and medical records and treatment histories hold different unstructured data points such as emotive language along with medical and shorthand terminology. The sophisticated information Patient demographic details. C. Zheng 4 processing system of ChatGPT - 4achinery recognizes irrelevant data points which encompass patient demographic data along with surgical records with medications and clinical documentation. Based on its analysis the system identifies critical clinical issues such as infections along with impaired wound healing based on health professional ob servations. With its functionality ChatGPT - 4 monitors repeating factors between various