product choice between implants and flap reconstruction and personal preference knowledge. A diagram in illustrates how Gemini interacts with users through its process. The system offers individualized physical therapy suggestions that emphasize individual patient requirements and situations for improved recovery outcomes. Physical rehabilitation at Gemini gets consultation from psychological support services aimed at short - term mental recov ery to help patients deal with their emotional and psychological healing requirements. The overall treatment approach merges physical efficacy with emotional support to provide improved recovery outcomes to all patients. Gemini starts clinical complication identification by assessing crucial recovery - related parameters that influence the patient. Analyzing past information through this system the software traces the process of recovery of surgical wounds following surgeries. Facilitating Output of preprocessing ( a ) Data Imputation, ( b ) Confidence score, ( c ) Lemmatization, ( d ) Stemming. BioBERT output. C. Zheng 5 early detection of possible complications like infections or slow healing. Gemini system analyzes psychological risks that are generally faced by individuals who require breast cancer reconstruction surgery. The clinical evaluation suggests immediate therapeutic measures such as psychological tests augmented by emotional guidance to treat sensitive issues which leads to enhanced overall recovery based on its results. This evaluation process aims at giving proper treatment to gain physical re covery and emotional well - being of patients. The specific benefits of ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini models involved in breast cancer reconstruction arise from the data given in ChatGPT - 4 outshines quick data processing and real - time proposals, while Gemini provides more thoughtful, fact - based predictive insights and comprehensive care surrounding the physical and emotional di mensions of recovery. 4. Results The ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini model is recommended for patient - Working process of ChatGPT - 4. Working procedure of Gemini. Advantages of ChatGPT - 4 and Gemini for Breast cancer reconstruction. Feature ChatGPT - 4 Gemini Specialty General NLP along with extensive medical expertise. Thorough medical reasoning with expert healthcare insights. Data Clarification Gathers details from clinical records and notes. Unites patient information with empirically founded medical guidelines. Analytical Modeling Recognizes typical patterns and forecasts usual results. Offers detailed evaluations of risk and long - term predictions. Customization Produces individualized recommendations. Develop extensive rehabilitation programs. Clinical Utility Facilitates efficient decision - making through