Although commercial LLMs, such as ChatGPT and GPT - 44, offer advanced capabilities, their closed - source nature restricts the ﬂexible customization and accessibility required for medical use. This limitation has spurred the researchtowardsdevelopingopen - sourceLLMssuchasLLaMA5, 6 ; Yetthese models still fall short due to their general - domain training7 – 9. To address these challenges, researchers have explored strategies to develop domain - speciﬁc LLMs for the medical domain. Instruction ﬁne - tuning of general - domain models, as seen in MedAlpaca3, ChatDoctor10, and AlpaCare11, attempts to enhance medical capabilities but is limited by thebasemodels ’ lackofspecializedknowledge ; instructionﬁne - tuningalone cannot compensate for this deﬁciency. Training models from scratch using medicalcorpora, exempliﬁedbyGatorTronGPT8, overcomesthislimitation but demands substantial computational resources and time. A more cost - effective alternative is continual pretraining, enabling models to acquire specialized medical knowledge while leveraging existing model archi - tectures ; notable examples include PMC - LLaMA2, Meditron9, and Clinical LLaMA12. Despite these advances, existing LLMs of continual pretraining in the medical domain exhibit notable limitations : Although both domain knowledge and instruction - following capabilities are crucial, only PMC - LLaMA2 has combined continual pretraining with instruction ﬁne - tuning, revealingagapinleveragingthesynergybetweenthesetwoaspects. Only one model ( Clinical LLaMA ) used clinical notes from electronic health records, which is crucial for real - world clinical applications as it provides context - speciﬁc information from direct patient care. None of the existing modelsusedbothbiomedicalliteratureandclinicalnotes, whichisoneofthe goals of this project. Due to the limited medical datasets utilized for model development, these models still lack essential domain knowledge, which hampers their effectiveness. By combining biomedical literature and 1Department of Biomedical Informatics and Data Science, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 2Department of Health Outcomes and