##cology. These reports inform clinical decisions and contribute significantly to epidemio - logical research, thus impacting patient care and advanc - ing medical knowledge. Despite their importance, the narrative, free - text format of these reports poses significant challenges for data extraction and analysis. The variability and complexity inherent in these reports impede systematic extraction of structured information, which is essential for analyzing large data sets, classifying trends and developing predictive models in healthcare. Traditionally, the extrac - tion and structuring of data from pathology reports have been predominantly manual, making the processes not only time - consuming but also susceptible to errors. These limita - tions are particularly critical in fields like oncology, where Fahad Shahid and Min - Huei Hsu contributed equally. * Fahad Shahid fahad1. shahid @ gmail. com * Min ‑ Huei Hsu 701056 @ tmu. edu. tw 1 Graduate Institute of Data Science, College of Management, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan 2 Department of Neurosurgery, Shuang - Ho Hospital - Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan 3 International Ph. D. Program in Biotech and Healthcare Management, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan 4 School of Healthcare Administration, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan 5 Professional Master Program in Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan Journal of Medical Systems 49 : 36 36 Page 2 of 16 the precision and timeliness of information are paramount for effective patient treatment and research. In recent years, Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) and Deep Learning ( DL ) have been leveraged to automate the extraction of data from these reports. Early NLP efforts were largely rule - based and statistical in nature, providing foundational methods for parsing and structuring text. However, as demonstrated in broader studies, these meth - ods have often struggled with capturing the complexities of medical language in fields beyond oncology, as highlighted in recent literature. As NLP evolved, Deep Learning models, particularly those employing convolutional neural networks ( CNNs ) and deep neural networks ( DNNs ) began to play a significant role due to their ability to manage unstructured data and learn from vast amounts of training examples. These advanced DL methodologies, while effec - tive, often require extensive and well - annotated datasets which are not only costly