report for the maximum dimension of the largest invasive focus if it is greater than 1 mm. strictly Provide the exact measurement rounded to the nearest mm as a single word. If this information is not available, strictly respond with'not specified '. ", " tumour _ additional _ dimensions " : " Extract the additional dimensions of the largest invasive focus from the report, presented as'length x width'in mm. If no additional dimen - sions are mentioned, strictly respond with'not specified '. ", " tumour _ maxWhole _ dimensions " : " Determine the maxi - mum dimension of the entire tumor field from the report. strictly Provide this dimension in mm. If the dimension can - not be assessed or is not mentioned, strictly respond with'not specified '. ", " specify dimensions " : " Check the medical report to determine if it states that the tumor dimensions cannot be assessed. If'Cannot be assessed'is mentioned, strictly respond with'Cannot be assessed'and include any specific reason given in the report. If the report does not address the assessability of tumor dimensions at all, strictly respond with'not specified '. ", User Interface and Output Validation The Streamlit application serves as the interface where users can upload their pathology reports as shown in view the extracted data and perform validations. Discrepancies can be corrected directly in the interface, enhancing the util - ity and accuracy of the application. The validated data is then available for download in Excel format, allowing for further analysis or archival displayed in Journal of Medical Systems 49 : 36 36 Page 6 of 16 Overall System Architecture The architecture of the system facilitates a seamless flow from data input through processing to output shown in The integration of Streamlit, GitHub Codespaces and the OpenAI API forms a robust framework that sup - ports the extraction and structuring of data from pathology reports, transforming unstructured text into structured, ana - lyzable formats. shows the system architecture not only demonstrates the application's functionality but also its potential for scalability and adaptation to other types of medical data analysis. This methodological framework leverages advanced AI within a user - centric prototype to transform pathology report processing, enhancing accuracy, efficiency and interoper - ability in medical data analysis. Results In this study, we utilized a generative AI prototype algo - rith