knowledge graphs such as DBpedia and Wikidata. These approaches highlight the importance of linguistic rules in understanding sentence structure, which helps in identi - fying the context identiﬁcation of entities. Similarly, presents a lightweight method for linking entities in Wiki - data based on heuristic rules. Hybrid AI approaches to EL, which combine symbolic reasoning with neural networks, are an active area of research aimed at improving the explainability of algorithms. Jiang introduced LNN - EL, a neuro - symbolic EL approach that combines human - deﬁned rule templates with neural learning, providing interpretability and transferabil - ity without extensive labeled data. However, this method is primarily designed for short texts, such as questions, which limits its generalizability to more complex domains. Plu propose a hybrid method that combines a linguistic - based approach combined with annotation cover - age facilitated by a KB. In, they perform EL as an information retrieval ( IR ) task. However, in, they propose BertMCN, which uses BERT as a multi - classiﬁcation task to normalize for mapping health - related entity mentions. In addition, improves the model of Pattisapu for medical concept normal - ization by jointly learning the representations of the input and target concepts using RoBERTa as the embedding gen - erator. This approach improves accuracy by up to 2. 31 % on three standard datasets. The improvement is signiﬁcant because previous approaches only train the transformation of concepts into embeddings separately from the mentions thatappearinthetext. Recentwork, suchasGallegoetal., proposed ClinLinker, which implements a two - stage pipeline using a SapBERT bi - encoder for candidate retrieval and a SapBERT cross - encoder for re - ranking, speciﬁcally tailored to handle Spanish medical texts using UMLS as KB. TheELliteraturehighlights gaps ingeneralizabilityacross domains and scalability with large KBs. While zero - shot and cross - lingual methods, they still struggle with unseen entities and low - resource languages. Furthermore, the integration of symbolic and neural approaches is limited, with current mod - els often failing to handle complex and ambiguous entities effectively. Future research should focus on developing more domain