that RoBERTa generally outperforms BERT in medical text. In any case, the entity identiﬁcation is a required step of the process that can be performed with the state - of - the - art methods that the researcher decides. Algorithm 1 Named entity recognition. 1 : Input : T 2 : Output : I 3 : procedure IdentifyEntities ( T ) 4 : I 5 : tokens preprocesing ( T ) 6 : entities ClinicalN E R ( tokens ) 7 : for each entity e and label le in entities do 8 : Add tuple ( e, le ) to set I 9 : end for 10 : end procedure 4. 3 Medical entity linking The NSSC medical entity linking uses a BK to generate the candidates ; it is conﬁgured based on the following parame - ters : Background knowledge base : We have built a back - ground knowledge based on UMLS. For each medical entity, the background knowledge includes all its labels, semantic types, deﬁnitions, and synonyms in other knowledge bases, such as DBpedia or Wikidata. These descriptions provide contextual information col - lected by the communities contributing to UMLS and the knowledge bases. Search engine : The medical entity linking system resorts to OpenSearch3 to search for background knowledge. OpenSearch relies on indexes and search methods and is able to scale to large knowledge bases. Query to be posted to the search engine. As we will see, experiments have been conducted to ﬁnd the most appro - priate conﬁguration of the search. The query may have the following conﬁgurable parameters : – k : It controls the number of candidates that the BK should return for a given medical entity. It is repre - sented by a natural number. – fuzziness : The degree of fuzziness or tolerance in matching concepts. 3 https : / / opensearch. org / 123 Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing 63 : 749 – 772 759 NSSC ﬂowchart : clinical note T with the set h∗, which is a set of normalized terms aligned to UMLS. NSSC takes as input a short medical note in unstructured format and transforms this text into a set of medical entities. For each recognized entity, a background knowledge (