diseases. The use of advanced AI models in healthcare requires careful consideration of ethical implications, particularly patient privacy, consent, and the handling of sensitive med - ical data. As these models operate within clinical records, strict adherence to privacy standards and ethical guidelines is essential. Transparency in decision - making and ongoing collaboration with healthcare professionals are also critical to building trust in the technology and ensuring its ethical use in healthcare. 7 Limitations This paper points out some limitations, mainly in the results. The execution time of the NSSC model averages between 5 and 15s. This timeframe is limited by the response time of the OpenAI API, which can vary. This problem can be solved if the LLMs are executed locally and do not depend on network overhead. The experiments were performed only on a benchmark of more than 400 terms, could escalate signiﬁcantly if we were to extract all the terms from a real hospital database. Therefore, ﬁnancial considerations should be taken into account. The use of an NER model before the transition to the link - ing phase may propagate errors from the initial phase to the subsequent phase. However, state - of - the - art models have remarkably high accuracy metrics that make poten - tial errors manageable and adapt to account for them. In the end, the LLM is responsible for the ﬁnal decision. It is important to note that this execution time may make the model unsuitable for real - time applications. However, once a term is linked, there is no need for repetitive mapping, paving the way for the creation of a knowledge base that links terms with their corresponding context. This can be implemented with a cache database that stores the entity, label, and linked terms. 8 Conclusions and future work The proposed hybrid AI system, NSSC, outperforms exist - ing approaches and thus represents a promising framework to advance the ﬁeld of information extraction from clini - cal narratives. Generalization to other diseases, coupled with considerations of training costs and disease - speciﬁc contex - tual information, highlights the potential impact of NSSC on diverse healthcare applications. Although the beneﬁts of NSSC are signiﬁcant, it is crit - ical to recognize the computational costs associated with training such advanced models. Training BERT - based NER, reasoning over symbolic systems, and running LLMs typi -