table compares named entity recognition ( NER ), entity linking ( EL ), and entity disambiguation ( ED ) methods across various approaches. Key characteristics analyzed include method type, use of NER, EL, ED, associated knowledge bases, types of text handled, and evaluation benchmarks. The table highlights strengths and limitations in each approach, helping to understand their applicability in biomedical data normalization Our approach formulates the problem as an optimization task, with the goal of maximizing the accuracy of medical entity recognition and linkage while minimizing the associ - ated costs. NSSC utilizes a hybrid AI model that integrates three distinct paradigms : deep learning, symbolic reasoning, and generative AI, each of which contributes uniquely to 123 Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing 63 : 749 – 772 755 NLP tasks. By orchestrating components based on these three paradigms, NSSC effectively recognizes medical entities and links them to standardized medical terminologies within con - trolled vocabularies, such as the UMLS. Furthermore, the modular design of NSSC ensures its generalizability across different medical domains beyond oncology. A formal deﬁnition of the problem addressed by NSSC is provided in the following subsection, as well as a design pattern outlining the core components of the proposed framework. summarizes the notation used in the spec - iﬁcation of NSSC. 3. 1 Formal problem statement Given a set I of medical entities, a set J of medical terms from a controlled medical vocabulary V, and a short note T. The problem of oncologic entity linking is to recognize from T, a set h∗of the correct medical entities in I and their links to terms in J, while minimizing the cost of δ ( h∗, T ). h∗ = arg min h∈P ( IJ ) δ ( h, T ) h∗is the set of recognized medical entities and their links to medical terms in V that optimizes δ (. ), i. e., h∗ = { ( e, t ) | e ∈I∧t ∈J ∧e appears in T ∧t is the medical term for e } δ ( h, T ) is a utility function that quantiﬁes the cost of correctly recognizing the medical entities in T and the terms in J that express the meaning of the linked entity in