World Health Organization, 1 2. 26 million women worldwide will be diagnosed with breast cancer in 2022. Furthermore, cancer treatment is an expensive pro - cess with signiﬁcant social and economic consequences for patients and healthcare systems. Electronic health records ( EHRs ) encode relevant infor - mation about a patient, representing a rich source for supporting clinical research. The oncology care process 1 https : / / www. who. int / news - room / fact - sheets / detail / cancer Álvaro García - Barragán, Ahmad Sakor, Maria - Esther Vidal, Ernestina Menasalvas, and Víctor Robles contributed equally to this work Extended author information available on the last page of the article generates a large amount of information that describes the evolution of cancer in patients. Physicians capture this information in the EHR using narrative clinical notes. Extracting and mining this information is critical to sup - porting oncology research and improving patient outcomes. However, extractingthisinformationischallengingduetothe complexity of natural language. The use of natural language processing ( NLP ) in the biomedical domain has increased the possibility of automatically extracting information from clinical oncology narratives [ 6 – 8 ]. Recently, deep learning - based approaches have shown their feasibility in obtaining accurate information in the processing of clinical narratives on cancer [ 9 – 11 ]. In the Spanish language, several studies have also aimed to extract information in the cancer domain [ 12 – 14 ]. However, these approaches have focused only on recognizing medical entity recognition or on the detection of negations and uncer - tainties using separate processes. They also do not use methods for linking entities or structuring the informa - tion after it has been extracted. Another interesting reference in Spanish is the Cantemist Challenge ( CANcer TExt Min - ing Shared Task ), presented during IberLEF 2020. This 123 750 Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing 63 : 749 – 772 effort represents the ﬁrst collective attempt to evaluate and improve the development of tools for named entity recogni - tion, concept normalization, and clinical coding, speciﬁcally targeting cancer - related information in Spanish. However, this challenge focused only on a single entity, tumor mor - phology, and did not deﬁne a complete pipeline. Instead, it was divided into three completely independent phases :