##cinoma ductal in situ, ” the NSSC system will extract the set of entities I = { ( “ carcinoma, ” “ can - cer concept ” ), ( “ ductal, ” “ cancer type ” ), ( “ in situ, ” “ cancer expansion ” ) }. Then, for each tuple, it assigns the most appropriate CUIs for each concept. For the concept “ carci - noma, ” the result might be ( “ carcinoma, ” “ Cancer Concept, ” “ { ‘ C0007097 ’ } ” ), where “ C0007097 ” is the CUI associated with the concept of “ carcinoma. ” 4. 2 Named entity recognition NSSC uses a BERT - based model to perform NER. We choose for this technique because of the nature of natural language text, where the quality of written notes tends to be suboptimal due to the pressures faced by clinicians. Consequently, these models are essential because they adapt to language nuances and are able to identify words even with grammatical errors. These models require an annotated corpus to learn. Algorithm 1 outlines the steps of the named entity recog - nition process. It receives a clinical note T and extracts a set of entities I. This set contains tuples ( e, le ), where le is the medical label and e represents the text that appears in the pre - diction for a label le by the NER model. This model is used after a preprocessing step. This step aims to prepare the clin - ical text before performing the information extraction task by splitting the clinical narrative into sentences and tokeniz - ing each sentence. Acronyms are then transformed into full descriptions, such as by converting “ ca. ” to “ cáncer. ” This transformation is achieved using a combination of regular expressions and a dictionary of the most common acronyms in the cancer domain. In a previous work, a model was trained to extract medical concepts using multilingual BERT. NSSC uti - lizes this model, this approach that takes advantage of a transfer learning technique to perform clinical NER in the ﬁeld of breast cancer. Transfer learning is achieved by ﬁne - tuning the BERT model with a classiﬁcation layer on top, as described in. However, in, it is shown