extensive annotated data. They typically outperform symbolic systems in most NLP tasks but lack interpretability and rely heavily on exten - sive training data. Hybrid systems : These systems combine symbolic and sub - symbolic approaches to exploit the strengths of both, aiming for high performance while maintaining some degree of interpretability. provides a selection of related articles. Most approaches focus only on individual steps such as NER or EL, with few proposing a complete pipeline. To the best of the author ’ s knowledge, no approach is specialized in the can - cer domain or speciﬁcally tailored to Spanish texts. NSSC addresses the need for cost - effective solutions to extract insights from oncologic free - text records by introducing a hybrid AI system. This system operates without the need for extensive data annotation and utilizes an explainable decision - making process. 3 NSSC — problem statement and proposed solution The Neuro - Symbolic System for Cancer ( NSSC ) is designed to provide structure and semantics to unstructured short med - ical notes, addressing the critical need for normalization of clinical notes within speciﬁc medical domains, such as oncol - ogy. The primary motivation for developing NSSC is the lack of robust tools and methodos capable of effectively trans - forming these unstructured texts into structured data, which is crucial for advancing clinical research, decision - making, and patient care. 123 754 Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing 63 : 749 – 772 Comparison of existing approaches for normalizing biomedical text Article Method type NER EL ED KB Text type Benchmarks Baevski BERT with a cloze - style objective train - ing – General text CoNLL - 2003 Luo BiLSTM + CRF – General text CoNLL - 2002, CoNLL - 2003, Ontonotes 5. 0 English datasets Solarte RoBERTa domain speciﬁc pretraining – Cancer - related narra - tives In - house corpus García - Barragán BERT ﬁnetuning + string similarity within a diccionary Custom dictionary Cancer - related narra - tives In - house corpus Gallego BERT Bi - encoder + Cross - encoder SNOMED - CT Medical notes DisTEMIST, Med