the LLM. – p : Length of prompt, expressed in number of tokens. – o : Answer length generated by the LLM. 123 Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing 63 : 749 – 772 763 Given all these parameters, the time complexity of NSSC can be expressed as O ( N SSC ) = O ( N E R ) + O ( M EL ) + O ( M E D ) = s · b + ( r · u + r · k ) + r · p · l · o As is known, the disambiguation process is the most com - putationally expensive since the number of neurons in an LLM is about 100 billion. However, the NSSC algorithm is optimized to minimize the use of the LLM whenever possi - ble. In the best case, the complexity of NSSC only involves the NER and MEL modules. summarizes the space complexity for the vari - ous components involved in the deployment, focusing on the required disk space. 5 Validation experiments This section reports on the results of the experimental study of the NSSC performance. The aim is to assess NSSC and compare it with existing approaches. We use a case study in breast cancer with real clinical notes. The experimental study is guided by the following research questions ( RQs ) : RQ1 : How does the integration of background knowledge through different query types affects the overall performance and effectiveness of NSSC? RQ2 : How does the cost - effectiveness of utilizing NSSC models for natural language processing tasks vary when employing different prompt techniques, taking into account the inﬂuence of token length on accuracy? RQ3 : How can the combination of LLMs and the back - ground knowledge contribute to better disambiguation of entity linking, particularly in cases where multiple entities share similar or ambiguous surface forms within clinical notes? The experimental setup is as follows : Dataset. We have generated an in - house corpus contain - ing clinical notes from nearly 600 breast cancer patients. Space complexity of NSSC Component Size SQL service ( saves all UMLS deﬁnitions ) 126 MB OpenSearch service ( saves all medical terms of UMLS ) 2. 3 GB BERT - base NER Model 626 MB LLM service 0 ( API ) Code folder 6. 6 GB Total 9. 62 GB All the notes