101136 6 beneﬁt for the patient perceived by the radiologist and / or the clini - cian. The context of LCS implementation might have also favored the over - representation of 50−75 years - old patients in the FUP popula - tion. A signiﬁcantly higher rate of FUP was associated with the mention of the nodule in the conclusion ( This observation had already been made by Blagev in their review of 1000 CT pulmo - nary angiography. Finally, COVID - 19 associated CT were less likely to be followed, according to univariate and multivariate analyses. A possible explanation is that the French healthcare system has been heavily affected by the pandemic, and many scheduled consultations, surgeries, and imaging procedures were delayed. In our population, 36 lung cancers were diagnosed, representing around 2 % of IPN, with a substantial proportion ( 45 % ) of non - meta - static stage, allowing to consider a curative therapy. Overall, IPN is a frequent ﬁnding, not enough monitored. Several avenues for improvement can be further explored : ﬁrstly, a structured reporting and the mention of the IPN in the impression part by the radiologist seem very important. Secondly, facilitating the communication between radiologist and care providers could lead to substantial improvement in the FUP rate : NLP tool allowing to extract the radiologist recommendation from the CT report, patient tracking system, or NLP - based generation of FUP recommendations from the CT reports have been reported. Finally, the care - giver in charge of the patient at the time of nodule discovery is often limited by time, knowledge, and resources in providing the preferred level of care. This could be addressed by the development of lung nodule surveillance programs. Our conclusions must be interpreted with some limitations : patient ’ s FUP was considered only within our institution, and we did not consider the external FUP of the patients. Under - estimation of the FUP rate might have been favored by the FUP of some nodules in non - specialized medical departments, not included in our analysis. Misclassiﬁcation of nodules might have occurred because of incor - rectly reported CT scan indication. Even if our NLP tool was not sup - posed to retain benign nodules, we did not evaluate its accuracy to discriminate this nodule subclass. 6.