of chest CTs or consultations were also collected. We con - sidered as adequate FUP, a patient who received a chest CT and / or a E. Grolleau, S. Couraud, E. Jupin Delevaux Respiratory Medicine and Research 86 101136 2 consultation ( in the pulmonology, thoracic surgery and / or radiation oncology departments ) during the study period and after the nodule discovery. Other patients were considered as belonging to the No FUP group. Manual review of the patient ’ s medical records was per - formed for patients with a diagnosis of cancer. 3. Statistical analysis Analyses were performed using R, version “ 2022. 02. 1 + 46100 ( The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria ). We utilized a Bonferroni correction to adjust for multiple testing, separately for the two sets of comparisons after which p - values 0. 006 ( for univar - iate ) and p - values 0. 004 ( for multivariate ) were considered as sta - tistically signiﬁcant. Continuous variables were reported as mean with standard deviation ( SD ) and categorical variables as count with percentages and their 95 % conﬁdence intervals ( CI95 % ). Variables of interest were compared between the FUP group and the No FUP group, using x2 test for categorical variables and Wilcoxon - Mann - Whitney U test test for continuous variables that did not have a nor - mal distribution according to Shapiro test. Logistic regression analysis was performed to examine the association between the independent variables and the follow up, using “ glm ” function and “ forrestmodel ” package. New categorical variables were created from quantitative variables. Cutoff were chosen for their clinical relevance. Missing data were reported as such and included as a value of the concerned variables in the multivariate analysis. Only relevant variables, statisti - cally signiﬁcant in univariate analysis, were included in the multivar - iate analysis. Interactions and multicollinearity were systematically evaluated. 4. Results 4. 1. Population and nodule characteristics The NLP algorithm identiﬁed 15, 996 ( 16 % ) positive nodule cases during the study period, out of the 101, 703 CT performed in HCL in 2020 (