##ibility Comprehensive information about changes in protein stability for 19 possible substitutions of a specific amino acid mutation. Ability of the mutated amino acids to adapt the observed torsion angles http : / / cupsat. tu - bs. de / Eris Protein structure – Physical force field with atomic modeling, fast side - chain packing and backbone relaxation algorithms. Free energy expressed as a weighted sum of several components ( vdW forces, solvation, H - bonding, backbone - dependent statistical energies ) Prediction of energy change of mutant. Options : fixed or flexible backbone ; backbone pre - relaxation ; e - mail notification https : / / dokhlab. med. psu. edu / eris / login. php ( accessible to registered users only ; free of charge ) SDM2 Protein structure Single mutation and mutation list. Possibility to predict stability score for a reverse mutation Updated environment - specific amino acid substitution tables, including residue - occluded packing density and residue depth and other interaction parameters Stability score analogous to free energy difference between wild - type and mutant protein http : / / marid. bioc. cam. ac. uk / sdm2 TKSA - MC Protein structure Temperature ; pH Calculation of the electrostatic free energy contribution of each ionizable residue using the Tanford – Kirkwood model with a correction that takes into account the solvent accessibility of these residues ( TKSA method ) to predict mutations for the enhancement of thermal stability of a protein Description of the charge positions, the reference pKa, the normalized solvent accessibility surface area, the energy contribution of each residue to the total protein stability and the total energy as a downloadable file http : / / tksamc. df. ibilce. unesp. br / pSTAB Protein structure. Requirements : protein length between 30 and 300 residues to calculate the effect of mutations on the net charge – charge interaction ; 150 residues to predict folding thermodynamics. No hetero atom ( s ) or nonstandard amino acid ( s ). No disulfide bonds. No missing atoms The user can introduce up to four single - point substitutions with an option for eliminating functionally important residues Charge – charge interaction energy calculated using a modified Debye – Huckel formalism. Prediction of unfolding curve ( for proteins with < 150