Accuracy, AUC, Pearson correlation coefficient, consistency between G of direct and reverse mutations ( ideally, Gxy = −Gyx ) Data for FoldX and EGAD were extracted from Potapov PROTS - RF outperforms the other methods for single mutations, in particular for the hypothetical reverse mutations test. PROTS - RF performs equally well also in double - and multiple - mutation tests Authors of the assessment developed PROTS - RF and PROTS Thiltgen and Goldstein FoldX, Rosetta _ G _ monomer, Eris, I - Mutant 3. 0 65 pairs of mutations ( direct and reverse ) from different SCOP families, with available crystallographic structure. No reference to G experimental data Consistency between G of direct and reverse mutations ( ideally, Gxy = −Gyx ) The four methods generate predictions with significantly different magnitudes. Scaling the calculated errors by the root mean square ( RMS ) of the predicted values for each method would also scale the estimated errors Eris has the smallest systematic bias, whereas I - Mutant 3. 0 has the highest one. Rosetta has significantly lower errors Authors of the assessment are not involved as co - authors of the programs assessed Usmanova FoldX4. 0, Rosetta _ G _ monomer, Eris, I - Mutant 3. 0 Dataset of mutant proteins differing from 1 to 10 mutations. Resolution lower than 2. 5 Å, monomeric, without missing backbone atoms and nonstandard residues. Approx. 10 000 structures globally Consistency between G of direct and reverse mutations ( ideally, Gxy = −Gyx ) Need of manipulating protein structures before analyzing the stability I - Mutant does not allow to check multiple mutations Bias for single substitution : lowest for FoldX, highest for Rosetta For multiple mutations : the bias increases with the number of introduced mutations but not in a linear way ( I - Mutant 3. 0 not tested because it does not allow multiple mutations ) Authors of the assessment are not involved as co - authors of the programs assessed ∗The reader is recommended to refer to the original assessment article for further details. Downloaded from https : / / academic. oup. com / bib / article / 22 / 3 / bbaa074 / 5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 10