80 to chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 from barley, PDB file 2CI2 ) account together for another 21. 2 % ; thus, about one - third of the mutations analyzed is associated with only four different proteins. Moreover, there are cases in which multiple mutations involve the same position on the protein sequence ( e. g. in Gene V protein, only 28 different residues are involved in the 92 muta - tions associated with this protein, and in Phage T4 lysozyme, the 172 mutations affect 79 different sequence positions ). The distribution of the type of residues affected by mutation is biased not only in the original database but also in this cleaned one : 161 mutations ( 11. 3 % ) deal with the wild - type residue Val, and the first three more mutated residues together ( V, D, T ) account for more than 28 % of all mutations in the dataset. The situation is even worse looking at the type of residues in which the original residue is mutated : more than one quarter of mutations involve a residue that is mutated to Ala, and the first three more represented mutations in this case account together for more than 40 % of this dataset. Finally, in some proteins, only a single type of amino acid is involved in mutations : for example, the three mutations reported in chitosanase from Streptomyces ( PDB code 1CHK ) involve only Trp residues and the eight muta - Downloaded from https : / / academic. oup. com / bib / article / 22 / 3 / bbaa074 / 5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 14 Marabotti tions in RNase Sa3 from Kitasatospora aureofaciens ( PDB code 1MGR ) involve only Tyr residues. In other proteins, the wild - type residues are mutated in a single amino acid type : for example, in bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor ( PDB code 1BPI ), all mutations reported in the dataset change the original residue into Ala. While the reason of this bias is clear ( Ala scanning is commonly used to rapidly identify residues important for protein function, stability and shape ), on the other hand, it represents a pitfall in terms of possibility of generalization of the results in the field of the development of stability predictors. The quality of the structures indicated as