mutations inserted in 342 different mutant pro - teins. This dataset was manually curated and obtained by select - ing from the ProTherm database those mutations for which the 3D structures of both wild - type and mutant proteins were solved by X - ray crystallography at a resolution better than 2. 5 Å and with G values measured at T = and pH = 7. Once again, the results confirmed the existence of the bias with respect to the training dataset ( i. e. the group of direct muta - tions ) for all the predictors except PoPMuSiCsym, the tool explic - itly developed by the assessors in order to avoid this bias. PoPMu - SiCsym, FoldX 4. 0, MAESTRO and PoPMuSiC 2. 1 were also the less biased predictors with respect to the group of inverse mutations. The authors noticed that machine learning approaches are usu - ally more biased with respect to methods based on physics, prob - ably because the composition of their training dataset appears to be unbalanced toward destabilizing mutations. The bias is amplified for the mutations in the core of the protein with respect to those on the surface. After the publication of these two assessments, the bias problem was also investigated in a Letter to the Editor of Bioinformatics, in which Montanucci and co - authors added the test on INPS - MD, highlighting the very good performance of their tool, specifically designed to take into account antisymme - try problem. During 2019, two other assessments have been published, confirming the high interest for these predictors. Strokach and coworkers ( the developers of ELASPIC ) focused on three predictors ( including ELASPIC ) that they used in the con - text of the ‘ CAGI5 frataxin challenge ’ to predict the G for eight mutations in human frataxin protein and on three additional predictors not used for CAGI5 challenge. Two of them ( FoldX and Rosetta ) were assessed also in the past, whereas the third one ( Amber TI ) is a protocol to simulate the transition from the wild type to the mutant protein and to calculate the G of that transition. This assessment is limited by the very small dataset of mutations used to test the performances of the predictors ( one protein with eight mutations ). The evaluation of the