independent ’ the assessments in which the authors did not included predictors developed by themselves. summarizes the tests performed during these assessments. The focus of the papers of Khan and Vihinen and of Potapov and coworkers was to test the ability of the predic - tors to give an estimate of the real G between wild types and mutants and to predict correctly the stabilizing / destabilizing effects caused by a mutation. In both cases, the authors cre - ated a reference database of single - point mutations ( excluding those included in the training sets of the predictors evaluated ) and extracted experimental information about thermodynamic parameters of protein stability from ProTherm database. When multiple experimental measurements were available for a single mutation, Potapov calculated an average value, whereas Khan and Vihinen selected only one representative case ( no explanation was provided on the criteria used to select the representative ). It is important to note that experimental Downloaded from https : / / academic. oup. com / bib / article / 22 / 3 / bbaa074 / 5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 8 Marabotti Overview of the assessment studies of programs to predict the impact of missense mutations on protein ’ s thermodynamic stability Assessment Programs assessed Test set Metrics for assessment Problems and comments Summary of the results of the assessment∗ Conflict of interest Potapov et al CC / PBSA, EGAD, FoldX 3. 0, I - Mutant 2. 0, Rosetta, Hunter ( unpublished ) 2156 single mutations from FoldX and ProTherm databases. Averaging multiple measurements of the same mutation Correlation coefficient between computed and experimentally determined values The metrics used are insensitive to systematic biases Variability of G values in the database ( calculated with different experimental methods ) The servers allowed a limited number of evaluations EGAD and Rosetta give many unrealistic predictions if there are clashes in the structures EGAD does not allow modeling many mutations Best performing methods : EGAD, CC / PBSA and I - Mutant 2. 0 The authors have developed Hunter program ( unpublished, tested in the current assessment ) Khan and Vihinen AUTO - MUTE, CUPSAT, Dmutant, FoldX 3. 0, I - Mutant 2. 0, I -