ity of proteins as well as their flexibility and conformational dynamics. Indeed, despite the fact that proteins are relatively tolerant to substitutions, each residue influences the free energy both of the folded and of the unfolded states. Of course, muta - tions may exert different effects : it is long known that the most Prof. Anna Marabotti is an associate professor of the University of Salerno. Her main research focus is the analysis and prediction of structures and structure – function – dynamics relationships of proteins involved in rare diseases. Dr. Bernardina Scafuri is a postdoctoral researcher in the research group of Dr. Anna Marabotti at the University of Salerno. She is actively involved in studies of proteins of different sources using structural bioinformatics approaches. Dr. Angelo Facchiano is a senior researcher at the Institute of Food Sciences, CNR Italy. His research interests include biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology, bioinformatics and computational biology. Submitted : 12 February 2020 ; Received ( in revised form ) : 7 April 2020 © The Author ( s ) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email : journals. permissions @ oup. com deleterious consequences are usually provoked by nonconser - vative mutations ( i. e. those occurring when a wild - type residue is replaced by one with drastically different physicochemical features ), affecting residues involved in networks of interactions, mainly buried in the folded structure. The effects of missense mutations in decreasing protein thermodynamic stability are very well known in clinics : many genetic disorders, cancers and neurodegenerative diseases are caused by unwanted mutations leading to incorrect folding of the corresponding gene products. On the other hand, muta - tions can also enhance the protein stability, and even this phe - nomenon, though if less commonly, can lead to a disease. Thus, it is clear that knowing the impact of mutations on protein stability is essential to clarify the relationships among structure, Downloaded from https : / / academic. oup. com / bib / article / 22 / 3 / bbaa074 / 5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 2 Marabotti functions and dynamics of that protein. Consequently, it is also fundamental to identify the molecular mechanisms underlying the etiology of diseases associated with that protein, in the view of the development of a personalized medicine