models ( tree regression and SVM regression ) to predict the actual value of G Either predicted sign of G along with a confidence level or predicted value of G with other information about structural features of the mutant http : / / binf2. gmu. edu / automute / AUTO - MUTE _ Stability _ ddG. html INPS - MD Protein sequence ( INPS ) or structure ( INPS3D ) – Support vector regression trained on descriptors encoding mutation type ( in particular, substitution score, hydrophobicity score, mutability index of native residue, molecular weights of native and mutant residues ) and evolutionary information ( INPS ). Addition of structural features such as relative solvent accessibility of native residue and local energy difference calculated by a contact potential ( INPS3D ) Changes in G values upon residue substitution in the protein sequence https : / / inpsmd. biocomp. unibo. it / welcome / default / index EASE - MM Protein sequence of a single domain monomeric protein – Combination of five specialized SVM models to predict G of mutations. Each SVM combines a different set of features encoding evolutionary conservation, amino acid parameters and predicted structural properties such as secondary structures and different levels of accessible surface areas Predicted G and stability class : Gu in ( −inf, −1 ), destabilizing ; Gu in ( −1, −0. 5 ), likely destabilizing ; Gu in ( −0. 5, 0. 5 ), neutral ; Gu in ( 0. 5, 1 ), likely stabilizing ; Gu in ( 1, + inf ), stabilizing. Predicted secondary structure and relative accessible surface area of the mutation site https : / / sparks - lab. org / server / ease - mm / STRUM Protein sequence Single variation or multiple variation Gradient boosting regression approach using different features sequence profile scores for evolutionary information, structural profile scores and different energy functions providing accurate environment information Predicted G of single - point mutation http : / / zhanglab. ccmb. med. umich. edu / STRUM / PON - tstab Protein sequence Temperature ; pH ; single variation or multiple variation Random forests tool based on similarity features, conservation features, amino acid features, variation type features, neighborhood features,