approaches and conditions were overcome, and systematic bias was distin - guishable from random errors. In their article, the authors pre - sented PROTS, a novel fragment - based protein thermostability potential in two different versions ( PROTS _ SEQ uses sequence information and PROTS uses structure information ), developed as an integrated analysis of both thousands of thermophilic and mesophilic protein structures and a large dataset of point mutations for which changes of melting temperatures were experimentally determined. The authors performed a compar - ison of the performances of PROTS and PROTS _ Seq to other predictors, i. e. MUpro, I - Mutant 2. 0, LSE, FoldX and EGAD. The hypothetical reverse mutations approach was used to compare predictions of Tm and G, by considering that both variations are expected to be opposite in case of reversed mutation. The same approach was used again in 2012 by Li and Fang to compare the same predictors with two new versions of PROTS, based on random forest algorithm, able to manage not only single - but also multiple - point mutations. In the assessments made by Fang and coworkers, the predictor developed by these authors outperformed the others tested, especially in terms of robustness in the tests conducted using the hypothetical reverse mutation approach. In 2012, another assessment was made, based on the principle described for the first time in, for four tools, two of which ( FoldX and I - Mutant 3. 0 ) already tested in the past, together with a new version of Rosetta, and another method ( Eris ). The authors created a database of 65 pairs of proteins with known crystal structures, from different SCOP families, where the members of each pair differ for a single muta - tion. Mutations were classified into structure - preserving and structure - modifying on the basis of the root mean square devia - tion ( RMSD ) between the backbone atoms of the two proteins in each pair, and also SASA and secondary structures were taken into account. The results of that assessment showed that the new version of Rosetta was the best predictor and I - Mutant 3. 0 was the one with the lowest random error and the highest systematic bias. The authors argued that the result depended on the fact that I - Mutant 3. 0 is based on