##PMuSiC 2. 0, the backbone torsion angles and secondary structure specificity are additionally evaluated for predictions. Eris allows to model backbone flexibility, in order to take into account the backbone adaptation in case of small - to - large mutations and to improve the G estimation in these cases. Other structural features taken into account by some predictors are the type of interactions between the residue and the surrounding atoms. For example, NeEMO uses residue interaction networks to represent different types of physicochemical bonds among the amino acids of the protein of interest, whereas ELASPIC first calculates the atomic contacts between the residue of interest and its surroundings and then classifies those atomic contacts as hydrophobic, hydrophilic or electrostatic using a distance cut - off to calculate interactions. Long - range effects are crucial to understand entirely the effects of many mutations in proteins. Indeed, because of long - range correlations, a mutation not only can perturb its surround - ings but also other spatially distant parts of the protein. A way to infer these effects is to perform correlation analysis based on elastic network models. To date, only few predictors have incorporated this analysis. ENCoM was the first one, based on normal mode analysis, but unfortunately its web server is currently unavailable. More recently, an original approach has been developed by Rodrigues and coworkers, which integrates normal mode analysis and two methods based on statistical potentials ( already integrated in a meta - predictor ), in a new consensus predictor for protein stability changes upon mutation ( DynaMut ). Evolutionary information is included to check whether an amino acid is conserved among different organisms. Moreover, evolutionary information may help to detect environmental con - ditions determined by side chains that surround the mutated amino acid and how they must by conserved or balanced during evolution. The direct - coupling analysis is an approach used to take into account residue coevolution : when two residues of a protein interact, the substitution of one of them may destabi - lize the protein, so another substitution on the other residue may compensate the effect and maintain the right contact and interaction. Computational approaches to direct - coupling anal - ysis can identify residue pairs coevolved, although this might imply that at least two substitutions must be considered. Alternatively, it can be applied for single mutations by using the ‘ predicted ’ contacts as a proxy for real contacts. When the