1 Briefings in Bioinformatics, 22, 2021, 1–17 Method Review Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview Anna Marabotti , Bernardina Scafuri and Angelo Facchiano Corresponding author: Anna Marabotti, Department of Chemistry and Biology ‘A. Zambelli’, University of Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II, 132, 84084 Fisciano (SA), Italy. Tel.: +39 089 969583; Fax: +39 089 969603; E-mail: amarabotti@unisa.it and Angelo Facchiano, CNR-ISA, National Research Council, Institute of Food Science, Via Roma 64, 83100 Avellino, Italy. Tel.: +39 0825 299625; Fax: +39 0825 781585; E-mail: angelo.facchiano@isa.cnr.it Abstract A very large number of computational methods to predict the change in thermodynamic stability of proteins due to mutations have been developed during the last 30 years, and many different web servers are currently available. Nevertheless, most of them suffer from severe drawbacks that decrease their general reliability and, consequently, their applicability to different goals such as protein engineering or the predictions of the effects of mutations in genetic diseases. In this review, we have summarized all the main approaches used to develop these tools, with a survey of the web servers currently available. Moreover, we have also reviewed the different assessments made during the years, in order to allow the reader to check directly the different performances of these tools, to select the one that best fits his/her needs, and to help naïve users in finding the best option for their needs. Key words: mutations; machine learning; protein structure; protein sequence; thermodynamic stability Introduction The tertiary structure of the proteins can be considered a ther- modynamic compromise between the need of keeping the struc- ture quite rigid to preserve its fold and the need of allowing a certain degree of flexibility to promote the function. This fine balance results in an overall marginal stability of the protein in aqueous solution at room temperature, equivalent to a few weak interactions [1–4]. Missense mutations can affect the thermodynamic stabil- ity of proteins as well as their flexibility and conformational dynamics . Indeed, despite the fact that proteins are relatively tolerant to substitutions, each residue influences the free energy both of the folded and of the unfolded states. Of course, muta- tions may exert different effects: it is long known that the most Prof. Anna Marabotti is an associate professor of the University of Salerno. Her main research focus is the analysis and prediction of structures and structure–function–dynamics relationships of proteins involved in rare diseases. Dr. Bernardina Scafuri is a postdoctoral researcher in the research group of Dr. Anna Marabotti at the University of Salerno. She is actively involved in studies of proteins of different sources using structural bioinformatics approaches. Dr. Angelo Facchiano is a senior researcher at the Institute of Food Sciences, CNR Italy. His research interests include biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology, bioinformatics and computational biology. Submitted: 12 February 2020; Received (in revised form): 7 April 2020 © The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com deleterious consequences are usually provoked by nonconser- vative mutations (i.e. those occurring when a wild-type residue is replaced by one with drastically different physicochemical features), affecting residues involved in networks of interactions, mainly buried in the folded structure . The effects of missense mutations in decreasing protein thermodynamic stability are very well known in clinics: many genetic disorders, cancers and neurodegenerative diseases are caused by unwanted mutations leading to incorrect folding of the corresponding gene products . On the other hand, muta- tions can also enhance the protein stability, and even this phe- nomenon, though if less commonly, can lead to a disease . Thus, it is clear that knowing the impact of mutations on protein stability is essential to clarify the relationships among structure, Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 2 Marabotti functions and dynamics of that protein. Consequently, it is also fundamental to identify the molecular mechanisms underlying the etiology of diseases associated with that protein, in the view of the development of a personalized medicine approach . The direct measurement of the impact of a large number of mutations on protein’s stability is usually not trivial to be made by experimental methods. Therefore, in order to overcome this limitation, many computational approaches have been devel- oped during the years to predict the thermodynamic stability changes of proteins upon mutations. In this review, we present an overview of the most recent or up-to-date freely available methods to predict protein ther- modynamic stability, and of their problems and pitfalls. We would like to point out that we have deliberately excluded from this review all those tools that predict the phenotypic effect of genetic variants (for review, see, for example, ), since they include many other elements than stability to infer these effects, and therefore are beyond the scope of this work. Moreover, we have not even included here the analysis of the tools developed to predict the melting temperature (Tm) of the proteins. Indeed, the thermodynamic stability of a protein is correlated to its thermal stability, but the two terms indicate different aspects. Protein stability is described by the equilibrium of the unfolding reaction (folded ⇄ unfolded). The G of protein unfolding varies nonlinearly with respect to temperature and can be described by a bell-shaped function ( Hence, the thermodynamic stability is the value of G at room temperature, whereas the thermal stability corresponds to the value of the Tm, i.e. the temperature at which G = 0 . Information about tools that predict protein Tm can be found in . Computational approaches to predict the impact of missense mutations on protein’s thermodynamic stability The first example of theoretical calculations to predict the impact of mutations on protein’s stability appeared in literature in late 1980s . The method made free energy calculations using a semiempirical force field, starting from detailed atomic models of the protein structures. Being time-consuming, it was not suitable for large databases of mutations. Faster methods, based on more approximate descriptions of protein structures, simplified force field and a search in a limited conformational space, were developed later . In the 2000s, the landmark for this kind of algorithm was probably the work of Serrano’s group. FoldX empirical energy function , later implemented through a web server , combined several weighted energy terms developed to allow a fast and quantitative estimation of the difference in the free energy of unfolding (G) between native and mutant proteins. The authors reported a prediction error for FoldX below 0.81 kcal mol−1 for 70% of the point mutants included in a very large dataset , and after more than 15 years, this tool is still one of the most popular programs for this kind of application. Since then, a high number of programs have been developed to predict the G between a wild-type protein and its missense mutant(s) [18–66]. Tables 1–3 show a list of the tools developed or updated in the last 15 years and freely accessible via web servers, summarizing some of the properties of each tool. G predictions made by these tools are mainly based on two computational approaches. The first (and generally oldest) one calculates the free energy differences by classical equations and geometrical features, chemico-physical parameters or potential Three examples of protein stability expressed in form of G curve. The equilibrium between folded and unfolded state is described by the G curve. When the G has a positive value, the folded state is predominant. When the unfolded state is predominant, the curve has a negative G value. The G value at room temperature is indicated as the thermodynamic stability of the protein. The thermal stability is given by the Tm value. The Tm value indicates the melting temperature, i.e. the temperature value for which the folded and unfolded states are equally populated. For a given protein stability curve, two melting temperatures exist, also indicated as ‘cold’ and ‘hot’ melting points. The curves presented show some examples of how protein stability can be affected by an amino acid substitution. The wild-type protein stability is described by the continuous line, with thermal stability Tm1 and thermodynamic stability G1. The dotted curve shows one possible effect of a substitution: the thermodynamic stability is unchanged, while the thermal stability decreased to Tm2 value. The segmented curve shows another possible effect of a substitution: both the thermal and thermodynamic stability are decreased. As examples of other possible effects of the amino acid substitution (not shown), the curve may shift on the temperature axis, or may be flattened, or both, consequently the thermal and/or the thermodynamic stability may change. energy evaluations. Recently, two methods have been devel- oped for predicting changes in protein stabilities by modulat- ing charge–charge interactions, one using the Tanford–Kirkwood Surface Accessibility model and the other one using an Ising- like statistical mechanical model . Web servers based on potential energy evaluation developed in the last 15 years are listed in The second (and generally more recent) approach deals with artificial intelligence-based methods such as support vector machines (SVM) and neural networks. These methods are usually trained onto a dataset of proteins associated with experimentally determined G, taking into account a set of descriptors of the sequence and/or structural features associated with the G. One of the first examples of this kind of approach has been the one developed by Capriotti and coworkers in 2004 , later implemented in I-Mutant 2.0 . Since then, a high number of predictors based on machine learning approaches have been created, and those developed in the last 15 years and available as web servers are listed in The methods that apply the empirical energy function approach are usually computationally intensive and therefore difficult to be used for large datasets , whereas the machine learning approaches are usually more prone to overfitting problems . Additionally, some methods are more appropriately defined as meta-predictors, being based on the consensus among two or more methods. The web servers based on meta-predictors developed in the last 15 years are listed in Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview 3 List of methods to predict the thermodynamic stability changes of proteins upon mutations, based on calculation of free energy potentials, developed or updated in the last 15 years and freely available to users via web servers. All the web servers listed here were available at the time of the submission of the review Name and original reference Input data Optional settings Type of approach Output Availability SRide Protein structure – Structural parameters and evolutionary conservation score to find stabilizing centers Stabilizing residues in the protein structures http://sride.enzim.hu/ CUPSAT Protein structure Experimental method: thermal or denaturants Prediction for one amino acid or all amino acids Structural environment-specific atom potentials and torsion angle potentials to calculate energy functions. Mutations and mean force potentials are classified according to different structural regions, including secondary structures and solvent accessibility Comprehensive information about changes in protein stability for 19 possible substitutions of a specific amino acid mutation. Ability of the mutated amino acids to adapt the observed torsion angles http://cupsat.tu-bs.de/ Eris Protein structure – Physical force field with atomic modeling, fast side-chain packing and backbone relaxation algorithms. Free energy expressed as a weighted sum of several components (vdW forces, solvation, H-bonding, backbone-dependent statistical energies) Prediction of energy change of mutant. Options: fixed or flexible backbone; backbone pre-relaxation; e-mail notification https://dokhlab.med.psu.edu/eris/login.php (accessible to registered users only; free of charge) SDM2 Protein structure Single mutation and mutation list. Possibility to predict stability score for a reverse mutation Updated environment-specific amino acid substitution tables, including residue-occluded packing density and residue depth and other interaction parameters Stability score analogous to free energy difference between wild-type and mutant protein http://marid.bioc.cam.ac.uk/sdm2 TKSA-MC Protein structure Temperature; pH Calculation of the electrostatic free energy contribution of each ionizable residue using the Tanford–Kirkwood model with a correction that takes into account the solvent accessibility of these residues (TKSA method) to predict mutations for the enhancement of thermal stability of a protein Description of the charge positions, the reference pKa, the normalized solvent accessibility surface area, the energy contribution of each residue to the total protein stability and the total energy as a downloadable file http://tksamc.df.ibilce.unesp.br/ pSTAB Protein structure. Requirements: protein length between 30 and 300 residues to calculate the effect of mutations on the net charge–charge interaction; 150 residues to predict folding thermodynamics. No hetero atom(s) or nonstandard amino acid(s). No disulfide bonds. No missing atoms The user can introduce up to four single-point substitutions with an option for eliminating functionally important residues Charge–charge interaction energy calculated using a modified Debye–Huckel formalism. Prediction of unfolding curve (for proteins with <150 residues) from the Ising-like WSME statistical mechanical model List of the top 5000 stable mutants with details on electrostatically frustrated residues and mutational hot spots; optionally, unfolding curve in case of proteins with <150 residues http://pbl.biotech.iitm.ac.in/pStab/pstab.php PoPMuSiCsym Protein structure – Linear combination of statistical potentials whose coefficients depend on the solvent accessibility of the mutated residue, correcting the bias toward destabilizing mutations imposing physical symmetries under inverse mutations Prediction of the change in folding free energy upon mutation (G). A negative sign corresponds to a mutation predicted as stabilizing http://www.dezyme.com/en/Software (accessible to registered users only; free of charge for academic users) Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 4 Marabotti List of methods to predict the thermodynamic stability changes of proteins upon mutations based on machine learning approaches, developed or updated in the last 15 years and freely available to users via web servers. All the web servers listed here were available at the time of the submission of the review Name and original reference Input data Input data and optional settings Type of approach Output Availability I-Mutant 2.0 Protein structure or sequence Temperature; pH SVM-based web server, trained on a dataset derived from ProTherm Direction of the free energy change and its value for either all possible mutations of a particular residue or only for a specific mutation http://gpcr2.biocomp.unibo.it/cgi/predictors/I-Mutant2.0/I-Mutant2.0.cgi MUpro Protein sequence. Protein structure if available – SVM- and neural network-based predictors, trained on the same dataset as I-Mutant 2.0. Prediction of the value of energy change using support vector machine, using regression methods (recommended). Prediction of the sign of energy change using support vector machines and neural networks, using classification methods http://mupro.proteomics.ics.uci.edu/ I-Mutant 3.0 Protein structure or sequence Temperature; pH SVM-based web server, trained on a dataset derived from ProTherm G value and binary classification (G 0, G <0) or ternary classification (G < -0.5,−0.5 G 0.5, G >0.5) http://gpcr2.biocomp.unibo.it/cgi/predictors/I-Mutant3.0/I-Mutant3.0.cgi mCSM Protein structure Single mutation, mutation list or systematic mutations on a single residue Graph-based distance patterns among atoms to represent the residue environment and a ‘pharmacophore count’ vector to account for the atom changes introduced by the mutation. The resulting signature vector is used to train predictive machine learning methods in regression and classification tasks Prediction of the direction of the change in stability and actual numerical experimental value. Also prediction of change in affinity of protein–protein and protein–DNA complexes upon mutation http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/mcsm/ NeEMO Protein structure Temperature; pH; amino acid to be substituted (one or more, manually edited) Calculation of residue–residue interaction networks where nodes represent residues and edges represent different types of physicochemical bonds. These graphs are used to train neural network for the prediction of stability changes Prediction of G changes upon point mutations http://protein.bio.unipd.it/neemo/ Continued Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview 5 Continued Name and original reference Input data Input data and optional settings Type of approach Output Availability AUTO-MUTE 2.0 (Stability changes tool) Protein structure (no multiple models, no gaps; no alternative conformations for alpha-carbon atoms) Temperature; pH; amino acid to be substituted (single or systematic) Two supervised classification models (random forest and SVM) to predict only the sign of G; two regression models (tree regression and SVM regression) to predict the actual value of G Either predicted sign of G along with a confidence level or predicted value of G with other information about structural features of the mutant http://binf2.gmu.edu/automute/AUTO-MUTE_Stability_ddG.html INPS-MD Protein sequence (INPS) or structure (INPS3D) – Support vector regression trained on descriptors encoding mutation type (in particular, substitution score, hydrophobicity score, mutability index of native residue, molecular weights of native and mutant residues) and evolutionary information (INPS). Addition of structural features such as relative solvent accessibility of native residue and local energy difference calculated by a contact potential (INPS3D) Changes in G values upon residue substitution in the protein sequence https://inpsmd.biocomp.unibo.it/welcome/default/index EASE-MM Protein sequence of a single domain monomeric protein – Combination of five specialized SVM models to predict G of mutations. Each SVM combines a different set of features encoding evolutionary conservation, amino acid parameters and predicted structural properties such as secondary structures and different levels of accessible surface areas Predicted G and stability class: Gu in (−inf, −1), destabilizing; Gu in (−1, −0.5), likely destabilizing; Gu in (−0.5, 0.5), neutral; Gu in (0.5, 1), likely stabilizing; Gu in (1, +inf), stabilizing. Predicted secondary structure and relative accessible surface area of the mutation site https://sparks-lab.org/server/ease-mm/ STRUM Protein sequence Single variation or multiple variation Gradient boosting regression approach using different features sequence profile scores for evolutionary information, structural profile scores and different energy functions providing accurate environment information Predicted G of single-point mutation http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/STRUM/ PON-tstab Protein sequence Temperature; pH; single variation or multiple variation Random forests tool based on similarity features, conservation features, amino acid features, variation type features, neighborhood features, and other sequence-based protein features Predicted G of single-point mutation and predicted probability http://structure.bmc.lu.se/PON-Tstab/ DeepDDG Protein structure Single mutations or a list of mutations Neural network-based predictor in which the parameters are shared for each target residue–neighbor residue pair Prediction of the change in folding free energy upon mutation (G) http://protein.org.cn/ddg.html Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 6 Marabotti List of methods to predict the thermodynamic stability changes of proteins upon mutations based on meta-approaches or mixed approaches, developed or updated in the last 15 years and freely available to users via web servers. All the web servers listed here were available at the time of the submission of the review Name and original reference∗ Input data Optional settings Type of approach Output Availability iStable Protein structure or sequence Temperature; pH Meta-predictor: sequence information and prediction results from several elements predictors. SVM as an integrator Prediction of protein stability change http://predictor.nchu.edu.tw/istable/ DUET Protein structure Single mutation or systematic Meta-predictor: consensus prediction of two complementary approaches developed by the same research group (mCSM and SDM) and obtained by combining the results using SVM Protein stability score http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/duet/stability ELASPIC Protein structure Single mutation or multiple mutations Combination of semiempirical energy terms, sequence conservation and structural features to describe mutated position and its surroundings, with homology modeling to train ensemble machine learning methods based on decision trees Predicted G values of wild-type and mutant protein, predicted G value, structures of wild-type and mutant models, alignment file used to create the models http://elaspic.kimlab.org/ MAESTROweb Protein structure Single mutation, mutation sensitivity profile, scan for (de)stabilizing mutations. Possibility to combine mutations in different positions and to take into account multimeric proteins. pH value can be indicated Statistical energy functions complemented by additional sequence and structure information, combined with multiple linear regression, neural networks and SVM to generate a multi-agent method Predicted G values and a corresponding prediction confidence estimation https://biwww.che.sbg.ac.at/maestro/web DynaMut Protein structure Single mutations; mutation list Meta-predictor: consensus among different predictors (Bio3D, ENCoM and DUET). The first two predictors are based on normal mode analysis of the conformational variability, the last one is a consensus method based on two approaches calculating statistical potentials Predicted change in stability along with the variation in entropy energy between wild-type and mutant structures provided for meta-predictor and for the structure-based methods http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/dynamut/ Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview 7 Most of the web servers listed in Tables 1–3 ask for the protein structure as an input, whereas some of them use only the sequence or combine the sequence/structure information for a better prediction. When the protein structure is taken as input, several structural parameters are derived from it, to describe the spatial environment of the residue subjected to mutation. In most cases, these parameters rely on the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) of the residue, and on the distance patterns or contacts among surrounding atoms, which act as descriptors of the volume of the cavity containing the candi- date residue for mutation. Some tools, such as AUTO-MUTE 2.0 and SDM2 , replace the evaluation of residue solvent accessibility with other parameters, such as the calculation of attributes derived by Delaunay tessellation (for AUTO-MUTE) or residue-occluding packing density and residue depth (for SDM2). SDM2 introduces also the concept of ‘functional residues’ by identifying those residues involved in catalytic site, ligand binding and protein–protein interactions. In some other cases, for example, MUpro , CUPSAT and PoPMuSiC 2.0 , the backbone torsion angles and secondary structure specificity are additionally evaluated for predictions. Eris allows to model backbone flexibility, in order to take into account the backbone adaptation in case of small-to-large mutations and to improve the G estimation in these cases. Other structural features taken into account by some predictors are the type of interactions between the residue and the surrounding atoms. For example, NeEMO uses residue interaction networks to represent different types of physicochemical bonds among the amino acids of the protein of interest, whereas ELASPIC first calculates the atomic contacts between the residue of interest and its surroundings and then classifies those atomic contacts as hydrophobic, hydrophilic or electrostatic using a distance cut-off to calculate interactions. Long-range effects are crucial to understand entirely the effects of many mutations in proteins. Indeed, because of long- range correlations, a mutation not only can perturb its surround- ings but also other spatially distant parts of the protein . A way to infer these effects is to perform correlation analysis based on elastic network models. To date, only few predictors have incorporated this analysis. ENCoM was the first one, based on normal mode analysis, but unfortunately its web server is currently unavailable. More recently, an original approach has been developed by Rodrigues and coworkers, which integrates normal mode analysis and two methods based on statistical potentials (already integrated in a meta-predictor ), in a new consensus predictor for protein stability changes upon mutation (DynaMut) . Evolutionary information is included to check whether an amino acid is conserved among different organisms. Moreover, evolutionary information may help to detect environmental con- ditions determined by side chains that surround the mutated amino acid and how they must by conserved or balanced during evolution. The direct-coupling analysis is an approach used to take into account residue coevolution: when two residues of a protein interact, the substitution of one of them may destabi- lize the protein, so another substitution on the other residue may compensate the effect and maintain the right contact and interaction. Computational approaches to direct-coupling anal- ysis can identify residue pairs coevolved, although this might imply that at least two substitutions must be considered . Alternatively, it can be applied for single mutations by using the ‘predicted’ contacts as a proxy for real contacts. When the tools start from the protein sequence, usually evo- lutionary information is taken into account by performing multi- ple sequence alignments, and also adding some kind of descrip- tion of the ‘sequence environment’ of the mutant residue, by using predictors of structural properties, such as the hydropho- bicity scores of wild-type and mutant residues and their molec- ular weights. Some predictors combine different methods to obtain multiple sequence alignments with structural sequence profiles obtained by low-resolution structure models, to provide more accurate information about the environment of the residue to be mutated. This enhances the robustness and accuracy of the predictor and makes it applicable to many more protein sequences. The same information is often integrated also in structure-based approaches. An interesting option offered by only a part of the methods is the opportunity of indicating temperature and pH values for the prediction. This option gives the chance to evaluate how the impact of substitution is different at changing temperature and pH, being the environmental conditions not unique in biological systems and, more in general, for possible protein engineering purposes. Another difference in the input/output of the methods con- cerns the opportunity to ask for the effect of single amino acid substitution (the simpler case available in all predictors) or a systematic substitution at a given position. While the effect of a selected amino acid substitution is of interest to evaluate natural variants observed in proteins, the systematic substitution is an information more suitable for protein engineering studies aimed to the design of modified proteins that retain or modify their stability properties, according to the specific purpose. To date, only one structure-based web server predictor, MAESTROweb is able to evaluate the effect not only of multiple mutations at the same position but also of multiple mutations occurring in different positions. Moreover, whereas the structure-based methods listed here can manage a single monomer at a time, MAESTROweb can deal even with multiple mutations occurring in different subunits of multimeric proteins. Problems and pitfalls in predicting the impact of missense mutations on protein’s thermodynamic stability Methods and tools to predict the effects of mutations on protein stability have been tested by their authors by analyzing different datasets. Additionally, the performances of several predictors among the most popular ones have been assessed several times in the last 10 years in an independent or semi-independent way [39, 61, 67, 70–75], naming as ‘independent’ the assessments in which the authors did not included predictors developed by themselves. summarizes the tests performed during these assessments. The focus of the papers of Khan and Vihinen and of Potapov and coworkers was to test the ability of the predic- tors to give an estimate of the real G between wild types and mutants and to predict correctly the stabilizing/destabilizing effects caused by a mutation. In both cases, the authors cre- ated a reference database of single-point mutations (excluding those included in the training sets of the predictors evaluated) and extracted experimental information about thermodynamic parameters of protein stability from ProTherm database . When multiple experimental measurements were available for a single mutation, Potapov calculated an average value, whereas Khan and Vihinen selected only one representative case (no explanation was provided on the criteria used to select the representative). It is important to note that experimental Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 8 Marabotti Overview of the assessment studies of programs to predict the impact of missense mutations on protein’s thermodynamic stability Assessment Programs assessed Test set Metrics for assessment Problems and comments Summary of the results of the assessment∗ Conflict of interest Potapov et al CC/PBSA, EGAD, FoldX 3.0, I-Mutant 2.0, Rosetta, Hunter (unpublished) 2156 single mutations from FoldX and ProTherm databases. Averaging multiple measurements of the same mutation Correlation coefficient between computed and experimentally determined values The metrics used are insensitive to systematic biases Variability of G values in the database (calculated with different experimental methods) The servers allowed a limited number of evaluations EGAD and Rosetta give many unrealistic predictions if there are clashes in the structures EGAD does not allow modeling many mutations Best performing methods: EGAD, CC/PBSA and I-Mutant 2.0 The authors have developed Hunter program (unpublished, tested in the current assessment) Khan and Vihinen AUTO-MUTE, CUPSAT, Dmutant, FoldX 3.0, I-Mutant 2.0, I-Mutant 3.0, MultiMutate, MUpro 2.0.4, SCide, Scpred, SRide 1784 mutations, of which 1154 destabilizing (G 0.5 kcal/mol), 222 stabilizing (G 0.5 kcal/mol), 631 neutral (between −0.5 and 0.5 kcal/mol), from 80 proteins from ProTherm database Ability to classify mutations into stabilizing (G −0.5 kcal/mol), destabilizing (G 0.5 kcal/mol) and neutral mutations (−0.5 kcal/- mol < G < 0.5 kcal/mol) Variability of G values in the database (calculated with different experimental methods) SCide, Scpred and SRide predict only destabilizing effects SCide, Scipred and SRide can predict only destabilizing mutations Overall performance: best for I-Mutant 3.0, Dmutant and FoldX Best sensitivity for MUpro, I-Mutant 3.0 and CUPSAT. Best specificity for SRide CUPSAT has the highest accuracy, sensitivity and MCC for stabilizing mutations. I-Mutant 3.0, FoldX and Dmutant are the best methods for destabilizing mutations Authors of the assessment are not involved as co-authors of the programs assessed ∗The reader is recommended to refer to the original assessment article for further details. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview 9 Continued Assessment Programs assessed Test set Metrics for assessment Problems and comments Summary of the results of the assessment∗ Conflict of interest Li and Fang MUpro, I-Mutant 2.0, LSF, FoldX, EGAD, PROTS (structure-based), PROTS (sequence-based), PROTS-RF (structure-based), PROTS-RF (sequence-based) Dataset collected by Potapov and a dataset including 180 double point mutations from 27 wild-type proteins Accuracy, AUC, Pearson correlation coefficient, consistency between G of direct and reverse mutations (ideally, Gxy = −Gyx) Data for FoldX and EGAD were extracted from Potapov PROTS-RF outperforms the other methods for single mutations, in particular for the hypothetical reverse mutations test. PROTS-RF performs equally well also in double- and multiple-mutation tests Authors of the assessment developed PROTS-RF and PROTS Thiltgen and Goldstein FoldX, Rosetta_G_monomer, Eris, I-Mutant 3.0 65 pairs of mutations (direct and reverse) from different SCOP families, with available crystallographic structure. No reference to G experimental data Consistency between G of direct and reverse mutations (ideally, Gxy = −Gyx) The four methods generate predictions with significantly different magnitudes. Scaling the calculated errors by the root mean square (RMS) of the predicted values for each method would also scale the estimated errors Eris has the smallest systematic bias, whereas I-Mutant 3.0 has the highest one. Rosetta has significantly lower errors Authors of the assessment are not involved as co-authors of the programs assessed Usmanova FoldX4.0, Rosetta_G_monomer, Eris, I-Mutant 3.0 Dataset of mutant proteins differing from 1 to 10 mutations. Resolution lower than 2.5 Å, monomeric, without missing backbone atoms and nonstandard residues. Approx. 10 000 structures globally Consistency between G of direct and reverse mutations (ideally, Gxy = −Gyx) Need of manipulating protein structures before analyzing the stability I-Mutant does not allow to check multiple mutations Bias for single substitution: lowest for FoldX, highest for Rosetta For multiple mutations: the bias increases with the number of introduced mutations but not in a linear way (I-Mutant 3.0 not tested because it does not allow multiple mutations) Authors of the assessment are not involved as co-authors of the programs assessed ∗The reader is recommended to refer to the original assessment article for further details. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 10 Marabotti Continued Assessment Programs assessed Test set Metrics for assessment Problems and comments Summary of the results of the assessment∗ Conflict of interest Pucci PoPMuSiC 2.1, PoPMuSiCsym, SDM, CUPSAT, Rosetta, FoldX 3.0, I-Mutant 3.0, iSTABLE, NeEMO, AUTO-MUTE, STRUM, MAESTRO, mCSM, DUET, MUpro Manually curated dataset obtained from ProTherm formed by 684 mutations, half of which are direct mutations inserted in 15 wild-type proteins and the remaining half are reverse mutations inserted in 342 different mutant proteins. The direct mutations belong to the training dataset of the methods tested, whereas the inverse mutations constitute an independent test set. 3D structures of both the wild-type and mutant proteins are solved by X-ray crystallography with a resolution <2.5 Å. G measured at T = 25◦C, pH 7 RMSD and linear correlation coefficient between predicted and experimental G0 values for direct and reverse mutations. Linear correlation coefficient between the predicted G0 values of the direct and reverse mutations (ideally, Gxy = −Gyx) None reported All the tested methods are biased toward destabilizing mutations, except PoPMuSiCsym. SDM is the least biased predictor among the others Generally, the machine learning methods are more biased than physics-based approaches The best performing method for direct mutations is MUpro; the best performing methods on inverse mutations are PoPMuSiCsym, MAESTRO, FoldX and PoPMuSiC 2.1 The authors have developed PopMuSiCsym program tested in the current assessment Strokach Provean, ELASPIC, FoldX, Rosetta ddg_monomer, Rosetta cartesian_ddg, Amber TI Frataxin protein with eight mutants Mean absolute error between predicted and experimentally determined values, considering only those mutations with G < 4 kcal/mol Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation coefficients. Balanced accuracy and AUC for ROC calculated considering mutations with an experimental G > 1 kcal/mol as destabilizing and mutations with an experimental G 1 kcal/mol as neutral Very small dataset. Evaluation of a tool (PROVEAN) that predicts whether a mutation is likely to be deleterious (no direct prediction of G of mutations) Provean scores have the strongest correlation with experimental DDG values. Amber TI predictions have the worst correlation ELASPIC has the lowest mean absolute error between predicted and experimental value (MAE), followed by FoldX. Rosetta’s cartesian_ddg protocol has the highest MAE Provean has the highest Pearson’s r, followed by Rosetta’s cartesian_ddg. Rosetta’s cartesian_ddg has the highest balanced accuracy, Provean and Amber TI the worst The authors have developed ELASPIC program tested in the current assessment ∗The reader is recommended to refer to the original assessment article for further details. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview 11 Continued Assessment Programs assessed Test set Metrics for assessment Problems and comments Summary of the results of the assessment∗ Conflict of interest Fang MUpro, I-Mutant 2.0, STRUM, mCSM, DUET 125 mutations of 9 wild-type proteins in ProTherm database for which both wild-type and mutant protein structures were available Percent of inconsistence, percent of correctly predicted signs for direct and reverse mutations. Pearson’s and Fechner’s correlation coefficients of the experimental and predicted G. AUC curve for performance None reported All algorithms tested have a percent of inconsistency higher than 70%, being mCSM the worst. All algorithms predicted the signs of forward mutations with accuracy higher than 80% being MUpro the best, but the accuracy for reverse mutations was less than 30%. Thus, all tested algorithms are prone to overfitting. Authors of the assessment are not involved as co-authors of the programs assessed ∗The reader is recommended to refer to the original assessment article for further details. uncertainty affects the highest possible accuracy that predictors may obtain, as it has been highlighted and addressed in two recent articles . In , four published predictors (FoldX 3.0 , EGAD , I-Mutant 2.0 and CC/PBSA ) were evaluated, together with Rosetta (a method that was not tailored to predict stability of proteins) and with an unpublished predictor devel- oped by the authors themselves. All these programs start from protein structure to predict changes in stability, introducing the mutations with different protocols. Mutations were classified following two criteria, being stabilizing/destabilizing and being or not hot spot mutations (|G| > 2 kcal/mol), and were divided in three classes (mutations involving Gly and Pro, mutations to alanine and all other types of mutations). In addition, two- state exposure to solvent was taken into account. Results were evaluated on the basis of the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of each predictor. The average error in the prediction of G (1.2 kcal/mol) was found to be much higher than the experi- mental error, and all predictors were found to underestimate the experimental results. The percentage of mutations correctly identified as stabilizing or destabilizing varies among the differ- ent methods (69–79%). The best performing method was found to be EGAD, but this predictor was also the one with the highest number of unrealistic predictions, together with Rosetta. In that assessment CC/PBSA and I-Mutant 2.0 were found to be the best programs in predicting a stabilizing or destabilizing effect for a mutation. Combining the results from different predictors did not improve the correctness of the output. In , 11 predictors, either sequence- or structure-based, were evaluated: Scpred , FoldX 3.0 , Dmutant , SCide , I-Mutant 2.0 and 3.0 , SRide , MuPro 2.0.4 , CUPSAT , MultiMutate and AUTO-MUTE , of which only two (FoldX and I-Mutant 2.0) were in common with the former study and three (SCide, SRide and Scpred) were able to predict only destabilizing effects caused by mutations. In this assessment, the statistical analysis to evaluate the quality of the prediction of the different tools was more thorough, and the authors took into account not only general results but also the performances of predictors with respect to the struc- tural class of the protein, to the SASA and to the volume of the mutated residue. Moreover, this study classified the muta- tions in stabilizing mutations (G < −0.5 kcal/mol), destabi- lizing mutations (G > 0.5 kcal/mol) and neutral mutations (−0.5 < G < 0.5 kcal/mol), considering that the experimental error for measuring G was estimated as 0.48 kcal/mol . Also in , the authors noticed that no program performed as well as reported by their authors and that there was no agreement in the predictions among the different programs. Matthew’s correlation coefficient (MCC) values calculated for the predictors were comprised between 0.27 (I-Mutant 3.0 structure- based predictor) and −0.39 (MUpro). This range indicates a very poor result, considering that a value of MCC = 1 is associated with the best possible prediction, whereas values near 0 indicate ran- dom prediction. CUPSAT was found the method with the highest accuracy, sensitivity and MCC for stabilizing mutations, whereas I-Mutant 3.0 (structure-based predictor), FoldX and Dmutant were the best methods to predict destabilizing effects of muta- tions. No significant differences were found among the pre- dictors with respect to the secondary structures in which the mutation is inserted, whereas CUPSAT, Dmutant, FoldX, I-Mutant 3.0 and MultiMutate were the best predictors for proteins with few secondary structures. In addition, this assessment noted that there was generally no agreement among the predictors nor between the predictors and the experimental data. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 12 Marabotti Li introduced hypothetical reversed mutations to test predictors of protein thermostability. Instead of comparing the performances of the predictors toward the ‘true’ experimen- tal G values, the authors tested the consistency of predictions between direct and inverse mutations. In this way, the limita- tions of the previous assessments due to inconsistencies in the G values obtained with different experimental approaches and conditions were overcome, and systematic bias was distin- guishable from random errors. In their article, the authors pre- sented PROTS, a novel fragment-based protein thermostability potential in two different versions (PROTS_SEQ uses sequence information and PROTS uses structure information), developed as an integrated analysis of both thousands of thermophilic and mesophilic protein structures and a large dataset of point mutations for which changes of melting temperatures were experimentally determined. The authors performed a compar- ison of the performances of PROTS and PROTS_Seq to other predictors, i.e. MUpro, I-Mutant 2.0, LSE, FoldX and EGAD. The hypothetical reverse mutations approach was used to compare predictions of Tm and G, by considering that both variations are expected to be opposite in case of reversed mutation. The same approach was used again in 2012 by Li and Fang to compare the same predictors with two new versions of PROTS, based on random forest algorithm, able to manage not only single- but also multiple-point mutations. In the assessments made by Fang and coworkers, the predictor developed by these authors outperformed the others tested, especially in terms of robustness in the tests conducted using the hypothetical reverse mutation approach. In 2012, another assessment was made , based on the principle described for the first time in , for four tools, two of which (FoldX and I-Mutant 3.0) already tested in the past, together with a new version of Rosetta, and another method (Eris) . The authors created a database of 65 pairs of proteins with known crystal structures, from different SCOP families , where the members of each pair differ for a single muta- tion. Mutations were classified into structure-preserving and structure-modifying on the basis of the root mean square devia- tion (RMSD) between the backbone atoms of the two proteins in each pair, and also SASA and secondary structures were taken into account. The results of that assessment showed that the new version of Rosetta was the best predictor and I-Mutant 3.0 was the one with the lowest random error and the highest systematic bias. The authors argued that the result depended on the fact that I-Mutant 3.0 is based on a machine learning approach that was trained with a database of mutations biased toward destabilizing effects. The performances of the methods were essentially unaffected by the structural change induced by the mutation, and similarly to the previous assessments, all methods performed best on exposed mutations with respect to buried ones. During 2018, two other assessments were made almost simultaneously. One was made essentially on the same programs analyzed in , except that FoldX 3.0 was replaced by the more recent version 4.0. Also the approach was the same as in the assessment made in 2012, but the authors used a larger database made by a set of PDB pairs of proteins which differ from 1 to 10 residues, collecting approximately 8000 pairs, at a resolution higher than 2.5 Å, excluding proteins with missing backbone atoms and nonstandard residues. The authors measured the bias of the predictors as a function of the number of the mutations introduced and found, in agreement with , that all programs are biased for single substitutions, being FoldX the less biased and Rosetta the most biased one. The bias increases at increasing number of mutations, but the increment of the bias is less pronounced when multiple mutations are added. The other assessment performed in 2018 was made by the group developing PoPMuSiC predictor and is probably the most complete assessment made on this kind of tools so far. Fifteen widely used G predictors, of which five previously assessed (CUPSAT, FoldX 3.0, I-Mutant 3.0, AUTO-MUTE, MUpro) and the others more recently developed (PoPMuSiC v. 2.1 and PoPMuSiCsym , iSTABLE , NeEMO ; DUET , mCSM ; MAESTROweb ; STRUM ; SDM ), together with another version of Rosetta , were tested to quantify their bias in predicting the stability changes upon mutations. All were structure-based predictors except MUpro. The authors used the same assessment approach as in , but they calculated also the RMSD and linear correlation coefficient between predicted and experimental G values for the direct and inverse muta- tions in their reference dataset. The dataset used as a reference was formed by 684 mutations, half of which were direct muta- tions inserted in 15 wild-type proteins and the remaining half were inverse mutations inserted in 342 different mutant pro- teins. This dataset was manually curated and obtained by select- ing from the ProTherm database those mutations for which the 3D structures of both wild-type and mutant proteins were solved by X-ray crystallography at a resolution better than 2.5 Å and with G values measured at T = 25◦C and pH = 7. Once again, the results confirmed the existence of the bias with respect to the training dataset (i.e. the group of direct muta- tions) for all the predictors except PoPMuSiCsym, the tool explic- itly developed by the assessors in order to avoid this bias. PoPMu- SiCsym, FoldX 4.0, MAESTRO and PoPMuSiC 2.1 were also the less biased predictors with respect to the group of inverse mutations. The authors noticed that machine learning approaches are usu- ally more biased with respect to methods based on physics, prob- ably because the composition of their training dataset appears to be unbalanced toward destabilizing mutations. The bias is amplified for the mutations in the core of the protein with respect to those on the surface. After the publication of these two assessments , the bias problem was also investigated in a Letter to the Editor of Bioinformatics , in which Montanucci and co-authors added the test on INPS-MD, highlighting the very good performance of their tool, specifically designed to take into account antisymme- try problem. During 2019, two other assessments have been published , confirming the high interest for these predictors. Strokach and coworkers (the developers of ELASPIC ) focused on three predictors (including ELASPIC) that they used in the con- text of the ‘CAGI5 frataxin challenge’ to predict the G for eight mutations in human frataxin protein and on three additional predictors not used for CAGI5 challenge. Two of them (FoldX and Rosetta) were assessed also in the past, whereas the third one (Amber TI) is a protocol to simulate the transition from the wild type to the mutant protein and to calculate the G of that transition . This assessment is limited by the very small dataset of mutations used to test the performances of the predictors (one protein with eight mutations). The evaluation of the performances of the predictors was made using different metrics (mean absolute error either general and considering only those mutations that have an experimental G < 4 kcal/mol; Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation coefficients; average of the recall for neutral mutations and for destabilizing mutations; AUC, i.e. the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve). The authors classified ELASPIC as the method with Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview 13 the best accuracy in predicting the G of individual muta- tions, despite a mean square error close to 1 kcal/mol. Rosetta was the best performing method in terms of distinguishing between neutral and destabilizing mutations. In their assess- ment, the authors also found that predictors based on protein structures achieved a relatively little improvement with respect to sequence-based predictors, with a higher computational cost. Finally, a very recent assessment by Fang focused on the per- formances of five very popular machine learning-based methods (MUpro, STRUM, mCSM, DUET, I-Mutant 2.0) . Fang evaluated these predictors with several statistical metrics such as the per- cent of inconsistence of predictions, the percent of correctly pre- dicted signs and the AUC. This assessment has highlighted that most of 70% of predictions of all predictors are inconsistent (e.g. a mutation and its reverse hypothetical mutation have the same sign, meaning that a mutant protein is simultaneously more and less stable than the wild type). mCSM resulted the one with the worst performance. Moreover, while the accuracy in predicting the change in stability for the mutation was generally above 80%, this accuracy dropped down to 30% for the corresponding inverse hypothetical mutation. These data are in agreement with the problem of overtraining of all these predictors toward a biased dataset. In agreement with previous assessments, the reasons for these discouraging results were found essentially in the data and features used to train the algorithms. A comment to the Fang assessment has been very recently reported to highlight that INPS-MD , a stability predictor developed to specifically take into account the antisymmetric property and not consid- ered in this last assessment, has performances very stable with respect to the direct and inverse mutation, indicating that when a machine learning method is properly trained and when the antisymmetry is taken into account, it is possible to obtain consistent results for both direct and inverse variations . Problems and pitfalls in the sets of experimental data of protein mutations In addition to the weaknesses of the methods developed to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability, another main source of errors in this field is the lack of proper experimental data that can be used as a reference. Recently, two articles by Vihinen’s group evaluated in details the benchmark datasets used to train and test the predictors developed dur- ing the last 15 years. In particular, these authors focused on ProTherm , a database that collects published experimen- tally determined thermodynamic parameters of protein stability, because they pointed out that all the existing machine learning methods have been trained by using data extracted from this sin- gle database, publicly available through the VariBench database . Indeed, ProTherm contains not only thermodynamic data but also manually and automatically curated information on proteins, experimental methods and conditions, literature infor- mation, cross-links to structural information that facilitates the analysis of structure–thermodynamic relationship of proteins, as well as mutational information and is constantly updated by the curators. However, the deep analysis made by Vihinen and coworkers confirmed that the data contained in this resource and, as a consequence, in the sub-selections used to train the predictors are affected by several problems . First, none of these datasets is fully representative in describing the distribu- tion of protein folds, domains, enzyme classification, GO anno- tation levels and the distribution of the coding genes to chro- mosomes. Moreover, in ProTherm database, several G values were erroneously reported with respect to the original data, others were reported with the wrong unit, others were measured in unphysiological conditions (extreme pressure, temperature, salt concentration etc.), and others were data for unfolded pro- teins and for very short peptides. Furthermore, several data were incorrect with respect to the protein’s sequence or structure . In order to encompass all these limitations, Vihinen and coworkers have recently created a new, high-quality, cleaned dataset with the following criteria: data were added only for proteins with correct sequence and structure, using a single representative measurement made in physiological-like condi- tions (pH between 5 and 9, low pressure, salt concentration lower than 0.2 M) and using the differential scanning calorimetry as a method of reference . This new database (freely avail- able at http://structure.bmc.lu.se/VariBench/stability.php) con- tains 1564 entries from 99 proteins from different organisms. Two hundred and thirty-three stabilizing and 864 destabilizing mutations are included, as well as 467 mutations that do not affect stability. Only 29% of the entries of the original ProTherm database are present as such into this new resource, which is candidate to be the best suited one to test and train prediction methods . In our ongoing research, we are dealing with the effect of mutations in proteins involved in rare diseases, and we are continuously trying to improve the prediction of their effects on the stability [89–91]. In order to test the performances of several stability predictors to select the best one(s) for our current activi- ties (manuscript in preparation), we selected this new promising dataset, which can be considered the best curated one for this kind of applications. We focused on a subgroup of proteins with an explicit PDB reference, for a total of 78 proteins (of which, 12 with associated NMR structure) carrying globally 1432 mutations. Regrettably, despite the appreciable and remarkable effort made to create a cleaned reference database, we noticed that it is still far from being ideal. For example, this dataset includes five cytochrome, five lysozyme and five ribonuclease proteins from different organisms, meaning that almost 20% of its content is related to only three different protein folds. The list of 172 mutations associated with Phage T4 lysozyme alone (PDB code 2LZM) accounts for more than 12% of all the mutations in the subset analyzed. The mutations associated with other three proteins (130 to barnase form B. amyloliquefaciens, PDB file 1BNI; 92 to Gene V protein from Enterobacteria phage f1, PDB file 1VQB; and 80 to chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 from barley, PDB file 2CI2) account together for another 21.2%; thus, about one-third of the mutations analyzed is associated with only four different proteins. Moreover, there are cases in which multiple mutations involve the same position on the protein sequence (e.g. in Gene V protein, only 28 different residues are involved in the 92 muta- tions associated with this protein, and in Phage T4 lysozyme, the 172 mutations affect 79 different sequence positions). The distribution of the type of residues affected by mutation is biased not only in the original database but also in this cleaned one: 161 mutations (11.3%) deal with the wild-type residue Val, and the first three more mutated residues together (V, D, T) account for more than 28% of all mutations in the dataset. The situation is even worse looking at the type of residues in which the original residue is mutated: more than one quarter of mutations involve a residue that is mutated to Ala, and the first three more represented mutations in this case account together for more than 40% of this dataset. Finally, in some proteins, only a single type of amino acid is involved in mutations: for example, the three mutations reported in chitosanase from Streptomyces (PDB code 1CHK) involve only Trp residues and the eight muta- Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/22/3/bbaa074/5850907 by guest on 30 October 2025 14 Marabotti tions in RNase Sa3 from Kitasatospora aureofaciens (PDB code 1MGR) involve only Tyr residues. In other proteins, the wild-type residues are mutated in a single amino acid type: for example, in bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (PDB code 1BPI), all mutations reported in the dataset change the original residue into Ala. While the reason of this bias is clear (Ala scanning is commonly used to rapidly identify residues important for protein function, stability and shape), on the other hand, it represents a pitfall in terms of possibility of generalization of the results in the field of the development of stability predictors. The quality of the structures indicated as