of subsumption techniques helped mitigate the challenges posed by sparse features within our predictive model. By hierarchically organising and abstracting SNOMED - CT concepts, subsumption allowed us to identify broader, higher - level categories that encapsulate a range of related clinical terms. This not only alleviated the risk of overfitting and unreliable Visualisation of common concepts subsumed into higher level concepts in the SNOMED - CT hierarchy Page 8 of 10 Houston BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 24 : 371 performance, a common concern in models trained on sparse data, but enhanced the generalisability of our model. However, the introduction of more abstract, top - level features meant that the final model was rooted in a level of granularity less commonly used in routine clinical practice. This has important implications for the practical translation and messaging of the model, high lighting the need for a clear and effective strategy to bridge the gap between the model ’ s output, which oper ates at a higher conceptual level, and the clinical realities on the ground, which makes use of specific and well - established terminology. The primary function of our model is to evaluate the likelihood of a positive lung cancer diagnosis when a patient enters the clinical pathway for this purpose. While this is a valuable step in enhancing early diagno sis and intervention, the success of a diagnostic tool is often measured by its ability to identify patients even before they enter the diagnostic pathway, ultimately achieving a significant stage shift in the diagnostic pro cess which is associated with improved mortality rates. The primary limitation of this study is its reliance on secondary care data, which did not provide sufficient longitudinal information to facilitate such an analysis. It is essential to recognise that most patient interactions with the healthcare system before a lung cancer diagnosis occur in primary care facilities, where symptoms are first reported and initial evaluations are made [ 34 – 37 ]. The absence of primary care data in our study thus limits the real - world applicability of the developed methods and highlights the need for future efforts to incorporate pri mary care data to truly impact early detection and diag nosis in clinical practice. A core limitation relates to documentation bias. Although purely data - driven methods were employed to derive the features predictive of lung cancer, most patients had only one document before their CXR, a referral letter. Therefore, we must consider the possibil ity that the referring clinician may only include symp to