month of diagnoses. The iterative process was per formed first considering only patients diagnosed with lung cancer within the subsequent month following their CXR, continuing to add more patients until 12 - months post - CXR. Instances of lung cancer diagnoses over time the respective model performance is presented in Feature extraction To extract structured information from the free - text data, named entity recognition ( NER ) was performed using the NLP software, CLiX ( Clinithink Ltd., London, UK ). CLiX was chosen due to its demonstrated effectiveness in extracting clinically relevant phenotypic data from electronic health records, as evidenced by successful applications in similar studies such as the identification of sub - phenotypes of diabetic kidney disease and the automated prioritisation of patients for whole genome sequencing. The free - text was queried against two resource sets, a ‘ Core - Problems ’ list containing common clinical symptoms and diagnoses, and the Human Phe notype Ontology. The top 100 clinical features for each resource set are presented in the supplementary file. The number of diagnoses occurring at each monthly interval, for the subsequent 12 months post - CXR. ( b ) The mean AUROC of the three tested models across each monthly interval, demonstrating the performance stabilisation and plateau from month five onwards. The shaded area indicates the standard deviation of the AUROC across the cross - validation folds Page 4 of 10 Houston BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 24 : 371 Feature Engineering To handle missing data, sex and ethnicity were imputed using the most common category. Symptom data were binary, and an assumption was made that if a diagnosis or symptom was not found in either the structured ICD - 10 data or identified by the NLP algorithm, the patient did not have the diagnosis or symptom. To ensure a harmonised dataset, all features were mapped to the SNOMED - CT ontology. To address the sparseness of features in the lower levels of the SNOMED - CT hierarchy, we employed a subsumption process to generate and maintain features at higher levels of the hierarchy, ensuring the inclusion of all subordinate features. The code for the subsumption method is freely available at : https : / / github. com / andrewhouston113 / sno medFeatureSele