##XR, a total of 1012 lung cancer diagnoses were made. The occurrence of lung cancer at each monthly increment are shown in Also, plotted are the number of diagnoses made following a repeat scan. The total number of diagnoses following the first scan pla teaued four months post - CXR, with additional diagnoses after which time being made only after a further CXR. Aside from lung cancer, other common respiratory diag noses in the dataset included : COPD ( n = 1883 ), atelecta sis ( n = 2432 ) and pneumonia ( n = 398 ). Risk - score performance characteristics shows the performance of each of the three models, in terms of AUROC, across all 12 time intervals. The performance of the logistic regression model signifi cantly outperformed the other two models, in terms of absolute performance but also model stability, denoted by the reduced standard deviation of AUROC. Of note, the performance of all models was less stable in the first five months, highlighting the likelihood of poorer class labelling resulting from a delay in diagnoses being uploaded to the EHRs. Considering the stabilisation in performance at five months, coupled with the plateau in diagnoses without additional scans, to strike the bal ance between the highest quality labelling and stable model performance, the ground truth labels established at 5 - months were used for all future experiments. Influence of age, sex and ethnicity on risk - score performance shows the performance of the model solely using the symptoms found in the EHR of the patient, then with the inclusion of demographic data. The inclusion of age and ethnicity was shown to improve the diagnostic performance of the model, increasing AUROC to 0. 69 and 0. 67, respectively. Gender did not improve model performance in isolation. The inclusion of age, gen der and ethnicity improved model performance across all metrics resulting in an AUROC of 0. 72, with an associated sensitivity and specificity of 0. 69 and 0. 67, respectively. Feature importance To understand how each predictor influences the predic tion of lung cancer, SHAP ( Shapley Additive Explana tions ) values were calculated ( The most influential feature was age, with older individuals exhibiting a sig nificant increase in the model ’ s output towards predict ing