##flow : the time required to complete the task and quality of the curation compared with a gold standard. To evaluate whether the proposed approach for rational enrichment allows curat - ing a larger amount of statements without compromising the quality, we calculated the average number of min - A workﬂow for the rational enrichment of knowledge graphs. This ﬁgure can be found on FigShare at https : / / doi. org / 10. 6084 / m9. figshare. 7642964. v1. utes required to curate one statement using our proposed workflow and compared it with previous estimates calcu - lated conducting manual curation of BEL statements [ ; ] ( While the average curation effort was significantly lower than manual curation [ 2. 19 minutes per BEL statement in our workflow vs. 3. 2 minutes per BEL statement in manual curation reported by ], our calculations included the time used by the curators to annotate the various errors made by the reading system ( s ). Therefore, if the curation exercise would have exclusively focused on curating BEL statements, the average would have been even lower. Moreover, it is important to note that our proposed approach does not explicitly require the time nor expertise required for corpora generation because the reading systems ( e. g. REACH and Sparser ) and assembly systems ( i. e. INDRA and PyBEL ) are applied to all available literature. Unfortunately, it was not possible to make a direct comparison to the reported 1. 7 minutes per BEL statement reported by Madan due to several confounding variables and the unavailability of further statistical information about the variability of curation time when using BELIEF. Although the amount of time required to curate a certain amount of statements with the proposed approach is lower compared to standard manual curation, the curation effort is also highly variable depending on which gene was curated ( To investigate how the curation effort depends on the accuracy of the reader extracting BEL statements, we compared the average curation effort between genes whose statements were accurately and poorly extracted ( We observed that the curation effort required Downloaded from https : / / academic. oup. com / database / article / doi / 10. 1093 / database / baz068 / 5521414 by guest on 30 October 2025 Page 8 of 13 Database,