Vol. 2019, Article ID baz068 a ) Recovered BEL statements per minute. Note that the time reported here includes the time invested in annotate the statement as well as INDRA errors. b ) A comparison of the curation effort between genes for which INDRA had high accuracies ( top 20 ) and genes presenting low accuracies ( bottom 20 ). a ) The distribution of the accuracies in triple identiﬁcation by INDRA for each gene. X - axis : Correct statements ( % ). Y - axis : Number of genes ( frequency ). b ) Distribution of recovered statements after curation ( mean : 74. 63 % ). to extract statements in genes whose statements were highly accurate ( top 20 ) was significantly less ( P < 0. 004 ; Student ’ s t - test ) than the effort required to curate low accuracy ( bottom 20 ) genes, which effectively took as long as manual curation. We conclude that the high variability associ - ated with the average curation times per curator can be explained by the extra invested time in the genes presenting low recall. The second aspect we evaluated was the performance in terms of quality. To investigate the direct quality of the BEL statements coming from INDRA, we analyzed the distributions of correct statements before curation observed in each gene ( accuracy investigation ) ( Most of the genes presented accuracies close to the mean accuracy ( 35. 75 % ) with only a few outliers whose limited number of extracted statements lead to their respective high or low accuracies ( see Supplementary Furthermore, in accordance with previous research assessing the quality of automatic and manual relation extraction, the accu - racies we observed again indicated that BEL statements must be manually curated in order to generate high - quality networks. After curation, the distribution of statements that were correct plus statements that were fixed during curation ( i. e. excluding statements that were incorrect and could not be fixed ) shifted completely to long - tailed distribution with an average of 74. 63 % BEL statements successfully extracted ( The remaining statements ( % ) could either not be coded in BEL or contained any relevant information about the particular gene. While curating the BEL statements, we also annotated the errors made throughout the process of reading, assem - bly by INDRA and conversion to BEL by PyBE