both of which are nebulous in description and difficult to generate. The scope must also be limited to certain classes of biological entities, their interrelations and the standard formats that are capable of expressing them. For instance, the entities, relations and formats used dur - ing curation are different for protein complex assemblies curated by the Complex Portal and regulatory inter - actions curated by the Signaling Network Open Resource. Similarly, curation guidelines must be defined reflect - ing these limits. For example, the guidelines of a project designed to model Tau aggregation inhibitors from the chemistry literature might encourage the curators to include direct binding partners of those inhibitors ( e. g. GSK - 3β, CDK5 etc. ) but explicitly exclude the biological mecha - nisms through which the inhibitors ’ targets result in Tau aggregation that would better be curated during a different project focusing on capturing molecular biology from its primary literature. While there is no alternative to proper planning, several semi - automated curation workflows such as BEL information extraction workflow ( BELIEF ) and the sbv IMPROVER provide assistance by auto - matically detecting entities and relations for curators to accept or fix in order to increase productivity and enforce correct syntax and semantics. However, these and similar systems are limited in their ability to capture the relevant chemistry and biology, and reversion to manual curation is often necessary. Most issues arise from the complexity of terminology used in domain - specific biology and the heterogeneity of chemical nomenclature in general. Further, compositions of entities and concepts ( e. g. there is a flex - ible and extensible terminology for complexes of proteins, such as the variety of combinations of subunits that form various nicotinic receptors ) remain a challenge as natural language used in scholarly articles is constantly evolving. Finally, the issues of insufficient resources and fixed time - lines apply to most curation projects, as aptly described by. Downloaded from https : / / academic. oup. com / database / article / doi / 10. 1093 / database / baz068 / 5521414 by guest on 30 October 2025 Database, Vol. 2019, Article ID baz068 Page 3 of 13 In the AETIONOMY project ( https : / / www. aetionomy. eu ), we manually curated NeuroMMSig, an inventory