##s the transcriptional activity of NFκB by enhancing the degradation of IκBα. Relation should be treated as an indirect, rather than direct, increase Update the INDRA PybelAssembler to make use of information about whether a relation is mediated through physical contact. on the enrichment step to generate 17 002 new BEL state - ments with an average rate of 3. 54 edges per minute. The resulting enriched KG can be used in reproductions of previous analyses leveraging the NeuroMMSig inventory to assess their robustness, deliver new insights and improve future analyses when the results are incorporated into a future release of the NeuroMMSig mechanism enrichment server. Additionally, the statements comprise a large train - ing set for future machine learning approaches for text mining. Conclusions We have proposed and applied a generalizable workflow for enriching and updating existing biological KGs with a focus on the reduction of curation time both in literature triage and in extraction. While its realization involved spreadsheets rather than a bona fide curation interface, we believe that it could be adopted by both BEL - specific curation interfaces [ e. g. BELIEF and BioDati Studio ( https : / / studio. demo. biodati. com ) ] and more general biological relation curation interfaces [ e. g. NOCTUA ( http : / / noctua. berkeleybop. org ), Factoid ( https : / / github. com / PathwayCommons / factoid ) and WikiPathways ]. Furthermore, INDRA is flexible enough to generate curation sheets for curators familiar with formats other than BEL, such as BioPAX or SBML. This workflow is by no means the ultimate solution for finding relevant content. Using pre - extracted statements as a stand - in for relevance allows a given KG to be expanded, but it requires several rounds to find the limits of a given pathway or graph, during which the scope of the curation could be lost. We plan to investigate other methods for identifying relevant content by combining topic modeling with mind maps to not only identify content at the entity level, but on a higher abstraction that allows for capturing of entire areas of biology. These methods could compensate for the simplications that we made to