, suggesting more false negatives. KNN showed lower recall due to its sensitivity to data noise. Discussion The study highlights the significance of using NLP in analysing clinical notes to understand breast cancer treatment outcomes in under - represented populations. The TF - IDF and Doc2Vec models were more effective in capturing relevant information than Word2Vec. The study observed lower recall rates in RF models, attributed to the dataset ’ s imbalanced nature and the complexity of clinical notes. Conclusion The study developed high - performing NLP pipeline to capture treatment outcomes for breast cancer in under - represented populations, demonstrating the importance of document - level vectorisation and ensemble methods in clinical notes analysis. The findings provide insights for more equitable healthcare strategies and show the potential for broader NLP applications in clinical settings. INTRODUCTION Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in US women, comprising 30 % of new female cancer diagnoses. 1 It is the most common cancer across all ethnic WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC ⇒Before this study, it was understood that breast can - cer is the most prevalent cancer affecting women of all ethnic groups in the USA, with disparities in outcomes among different racial and ethnic groups. ⇒The widespread use of electronic health records and advances in natural language processing ( NLP ) offered avenues for improved patient care through detailed data analysis ; however, there was a gap in automated, detailed analysis of clinical notes, especially for breast cancer treatment outcomes in women from under - represented populations, neces - sitating this study. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS ⇒This study contributes by developing a robust NLP pipeline to analyse clinical notes for breast can - cer treatment outcomes in under - represented populations. ⇒It demonstrates the effectiveness of specific text vectorisation methods ( term frequency - inverse doc - ument frequency and Doc2Vec ) combined with clas - sification models, particularly random forest ( RF ), in extracting relevant treatment outcome data from clinical notes. ⇒The study also reveals the challenges in achieving high recall rates in predictive models, highlighting the complexity of clinical data and the need for spe - cialised NLP approaches. HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRAC