results indicated the highest AUC perfor - mance when combined with SVC ( 0. 82 ), followed by RF ( 0. 82 ) and KNN ( 0. 73 ) on the test set. However, the Word2Vec model failed to train effectively with SVC, as indicated by zero scores in both precision and recall. For KNN ( 0. 58 ) and RF ( 0. 57 ), the AUC was also low compared with other vectorisation methods. In contrast, the Doc2Vec results showed the highest AUC when paired with RF ( 0. 90 ), followed by SVC ( 0. 86 ) and KNN ( 0. 57 ). Notably, the Doc2Vec - RF combination achieved the best AUC results across all combinations. The performance of Word2Vec was lower than that of other text vectorisers, and KNN was generally less effective than other classi - fiers, except when used with Word2Vec. Although we used k - fold cross - validation for hyperparameter tuning, the RF results from the training set suggested overfitting. Interestingly, the Doc2Vec - RF combination showed a narrower gap between training and test set results across all metrics. illustrates the ROC curves for text vectorization and classification methods ( DISCUSSION The main goal of this study was to develop an end - to - end NLP pipeline for extracting treatment outcomes of breast cancer among women from under - represented popu - lations, aiming to obtain important insights to enhance care for these populations. By focusing on these groups, our study sought to fill a critical knowledge gap and contribute to fostering equity in healthcare treatment outcomes. We designed and implemented a systematic and auto - mated approach that leverages NLP techniques to extract relevant information from clinical notes and accurately classify the extracted texts. We compared several algo - rithms to assess the efficiency of each approach. Specif - ically, this project holds significant value because it employed algorithms to analyse the treatment outcomes of patients with breast cancer from under - represented populations. These groups have been previously under - studied, leading to a gap in our understanding of how treatments affect them differently. By employing NLP to analyse clinical notes, we gained a more comprehensive understanding of the optimal algorithms for extracting treatment outcomes for patients with breast cancer from under - represented populations. This approach has the